So, welcome back. So, so far we have discussed basics of probability. Now we will see another
problem which actually takes the basics a bit further. So, let us work with this problem
which is very famous called Monteholl. So, many of you might have known this problem
called Monteholl or Monteholl, whatever you call it. So, what is the problem? We have
3 doors. So, there is door 1, door 2 and door 3. So, what is the premise of the game? So,
the game is, so there is a car behind one of these doors, one of these doors. Further,
are goats in the other two. So, the contestant is supposed to pick a door and this is the
process of the game. So, first the contestant picks a door and second, so once the contestant
picks a door, let us say the contestant picks a door once and then out of 2 and 3, so one of them,
either one of them has a car and the other goat or both of them contain goat. So, what will the
host do, the game show host? The host decides to open a door with a goat behind it and then the
host asks, oh do you want to stick with this choice of 1 or do you want to flip it? So,
let us say, let us consider a situation where there is a goat behind, so let us say we will
put a goat behind 2, there is a goat behind 3 and there is a car here and as we said before,
let the contestant choose the gate, the door 1. So, the contestant chooses this. So, now there
are two choices for the host to open. The host can either open 2 or 3. So, this is the choices
that the host makes. So, now then the host has the contestant saying, the host gives the contestant
the option to change his answer, his or her or their answer. So, this is the game. So,
you have 3 doors. So, behind one door is a car and behind the other 2 doors are goats
and the contestant has to pick a door and they get what is behind the door. So, in this example,
what we have here is the contestant, if they choose to pick 1 and there is a car behind door 1,
they would get it. So, now let us also make the premise of the game a bit more
explicit. So, the car is placed behind a door
that is randomly chosen, chosen with equal probability.
So, this makes sense. So, we have this like 3 doors. So, behind 3 doors,
the host decides to place a car at a randomly chosen location. So, this is the premise of the
problem and then what we are interested in is, so if the contestant decides to change their answer,
what is the probability of their win? So, let us go through this problem again.
So, you have 3 doors and a car is placed behind one of these doors at random and then
the contestant picks a door. So, once the contestant picks a door, there are 2 other
doors which are remaining. So, out of those 2 doors, at least one of them will have a goat.
Now, the host says, I am going to pick one of the doors which contains a goat and open it to the
contestant to see. So, it is possible that the contestant picks a door with a goat and then
there is exactly one door for the host to open. In the other case, when the host
has 2 choices of doors with goats, he can choose a door at random. So, with probability half each,
let us say the contestant has actually chosen the door 1 which has a car behind it and the door 2
and 3 have goats behind them. Now, the host has to open a door with a goat behind it. So,
he can choose it at random. So, with probability half, he will pick the door 1. So, this is the
premise of the game. And now, the whole point of this question here is, should the contestant
change their answer or not? If they change their answer, what is the probability of their win?
If they do not change their answer, what is the probability of their win? So, this is what the
analysis that we want to do using the techniques that we already learned.
Good, so far so good. So, based on what we have done so far, the first thing that we actually
looked at was, what is the sample space for a given problem? So, we will first note what is the
sample space. So, how would you define sample space for such a problem? So, let us see. This
is slightly more complicated and thus it makes sense for us to do it more explicitly. The door
with a car behind it. Two, the door chosen by
the contestant. And three,
the door the host decides to show. So, there are these three things going on.
So, let us say, let us rename our doors as A, B and C, so that we can use numbers for something else.
So, now, there are these three things going on. So, let us define a sample space to be the
following tuples. The first location corresponds to door with car behind it. Let me remind you that
this choice is random. And then, of all the possibilities, contestants make a pick.
So, let us call this contestants pick. And then, in the third location, what I have here is door
opened by
the host. So, we have the following tuple.
So, let us see how we can also build up the sample space using what are called trees. So,
let us start. So, initially there is nothing. So, now, in the first instance, you have three options.
The first option is the car is placed between behind either door A, B or C.
So, this gives us three options. So, this I would say is for car location.
Then, I have three choices for a contestant picking.
So, this is A, this is B and this is C. Similarly, I have
similar A, B and C. So, this is a choice of A, B, C, A, B, C. So, let me remind you this corresponds
to door picked by the contestant. So, now, once the door is chosen by the contestant,
the host has to make a choice. So, now, host knows where the car is and where the votes are.
If the car is behind the door A and the contestant has chosen the door A, then
this guy, the host has two choices. Either you can open B or you can open C. Both of them could
have votes behind them, I mean would have votes behind them. On the other hand, if the car location
was A, if the car location was A and the host, the contestant chose door B, then there is only
one option for the host to open, that is C. Here, again, so if the contestant chose C and the door
behind which the car is, is A, then what is the option that we have here? So, that option would
be B. So, these are the ones which are opened by the host. Similarly, we do the following here.
So, the car is behind the door B and then what do we have here? So, the contestant has chosen B,
contestant has chosen A. So, there is only one option for the host to open, C.
Similarly, here I would have two options because if the car is behind B and the contestant has
chosen B, then the host has two options to open, A or C. Similarly, I have, if the contestant chooses
to the C and the car is behind B, then what option do they have? They have only one option,
which is A. Similarly, we fill this as well. So, you have, so this will be B, this will be
A and this will be A and B. So, these are the choices that, so now,
so what is the sample space here? Our sample space will be corresponding to this, it is going to be
A, A and B and corresponding to the second one, it is going to be A,
A, C and here I have A, B, C, then I have A, C, B. So, this is the correspondence
space. And then I have here B, A, C, then similarly I have B, B, A, B, B, B and then I have B, C,
A and then similarly I have C, A, B, then C, B, A and then you have C, C, A and C, C, B.
So, all that you see on the right side, this form your sample space. So, this is what we are
interested in. So, this is the first step of what we have done in the basics of probability.
So, now the first question I ask here is, is the probability of each of these elements
the same? So, as I said, probability is a value that we are saying. And for this,
we are going to assign values ground up. So, what I mean by ground up is the following.
So, I am going to assign a value here for this edge. So, I said each of these values are chosen
uniformly at random. So, let us 1 by 3, I have 1 by 3 and I have 1 by 3 here.
So, again a contestant also let us say they choose their door at random.
So, again I have 1 by 3, 1 by 3, 1 by 3 here and then I have 1 by 3, 1 by 3 and 1 by 3 here.
And then for the and the host in cases he has two options, he will pick one at random.
So, let us call this half and half. So, in which case there is only one door they can
the probability is 1. So, again 1, half, half, 1, 1, 1, half, half.
Right. So, now what we will define probability for
this element a, a, b. So, this probability is given by. So, it is going to be 1 by 3 into 1
by 3 into 1 by 1 by 2. So, here it is going to be. So, it is 1 by 18. Similarly, here it is
going to be, 1 by 18. So, here it is going to be 1 by 9, here it is going to be 1 by 9.
So, here it is going to be 1 by 9. This is 1 by 18, this is 1 by 18,
this is 1 by 9 and this is 1 by 9, this is 1 by 9 and this is 1 by 18 and this is 1 by 18.
So, now, let us look at the following thing. So, the question was, given the setup that
we have discussed so far, so the contestant has initially made a choice. Now, the host
asked at the end of the process whether the contestant would like to change their option.
So, here, so we will say what is the possibility that the contestant wins
by after changing their option. So, that is what we want to decide.
So, now, let us work things out, even work. So, where can a switching win?
So, let us analyze the situation here. So, let us concentrate on this. So, the car is behind door
A and the contestant has chosen B and then the contestant has chosen B and the host has shown
the door C. So, it is known that the door C has a goat behind it. The contestant has to choose
between A and B. And in this situation, upon switching, the contestant would win. So, again,
so what are the conditions? So, here, the same thing follows, the same logic applies over here
as well. So, if the contestant switches their choice, so what do you mean? So, the car is
behind door A, the contestant has made a choice C, but since the goat is shown to be behind door B,
so it is possible that the goat is behind door A or door C. So, now, the contestant has to make
a choice. If they switch, then even under this, they will. So, now, we will first enumerate the
cases where upon switching, the contestant wins. So, now, let us enumerate. So, let us tick them up.
So, let us highlight them. So, this one, this one, these two are done, then this one as well,
then this one, then what else? So, you have this one and then you have this one. These are the
choices. If the contestant uses and uses them to switch, then the contestant wins. So, you have
this, this, this, this and this and this. These are the cases where switching helps the contestant
win. So, what is the cumulative probability? So, first, I will ask the students to actually
sum this up and ensure that the sum is equal to 1. Further, so what do we have here? I have 1 by 9,
6 times. So, what is the cumulative probability for these events? So, let us say the event that
we are interested in, the event of interest is actually given by the set A, B, C, then A, C,
B, then B, A, C, then B, C, A, then C, A, B and then C, B, A. So, if you observe carefully,
there is also a pattern to which the elements that are being chosen into the event have.
So, now let us use this probability. So, what is the probability of the event that we are
interested in? So, let me call this event E. So, there is nothing but summation of probabilities
of A, B, C plus probabilities of A, C, B plus probability of B, A, C plus probabilities of B,
C, A plus probability of C, A, B plus probability of C, B, A. The reason I am doing it so explicitly
is to revise your fundamentals. So, this is nothing but 2 by 3.
So, what does this tell us? This tells us that if the contestant switches their option,
then the probability that they win a car is two-thirds. So, this is where you distinguish
reality from the probabilistic estimates. So, it could so happen that the contestant switches
and does not win. But the probability tells us that in two-thirds of the cases,
the contestant wins compared to one-thirds of the cases. So, what does probability tell us?
Over all possible events that are possible. So, in two-thirds of the cases,
the contestant wins. There are cases when in one-third of the cases the contestant loses
by switching. But in two-thirds the contestant wins. So, now it is up to you and your wisdom
to either go by probability or not. So, the mathematics tells you counter-intuitively
that if you make a switch, you will win with a probability of two-thirds.
It is a probabilistic estimate. It is not a guarantee that you will win or lose.
So, what we have here is probabilistic. So, now what we will do here is,
so we will make this statement explicitly, which says contestant
could win with probability two-thirds if they switch their answer.
So, this is what the probability tells us.
So, this is a game that we have done. So, again, since we have renamed,
so I will call this door A, door B, door C. So, this is a famous Monty Hall program.
So, this has also bothered mathematicians for quite a while, as in like why this is happening.
So, now what do we take away from this? So, the take away from this example is that
you can actually list out the sample space using this tree method. So, previously we
examined the case step by step and then listed our sample space. But there is also a tree-like way
to describe your sample space. So, this is yet another tool in your pocket, right?
So, good. So, what we are doing implicitly here is, I have defined the probability of the event
A, B, C. This choice A, B, C is 1 by 3 times 1 by 3 times half, right? So, this is something
which I posted on the carpet last time. But you can assume this to be another axiom of probability.
Suppose, I have events
A, B, C that happen independently.
That is, the choice of whatever happens in B is independent of choice that is
made in either A or C. So, or the way B is picked is independent of how things in A and C are put.
So, now for this, the probability of A, B, C is nothing but the probability of A
times probability of B times probability of C. So, this A, B, C is not to be confused with the
door notations. So, for any sub-events E1, E2, and E3, if they are happening independently,
what I would have is probability of the tuple E1, E2, and E3.
The probability of this joint event, let us say, is probability of E1 times probability of E2
times probability of E3. We have used this implicitly throughout our first lectures of
probability. So, you can take this as another axiom of probability.
So, I will call it axiom of independence
and product.
So, this is the name that we give to this. So, people have, people use different names,
but for the sake of this course, let us call them axioms of independence and product.
It is good. So, one of the interesting things is, here implicitly there is some conditioning
happening. So, here this, so there is a sequence of choices that are being made.
So, now the sequence, this choice, the option of having C is dependent on A and B.
So, when I say this probability of picking C, the probability of picking C from the available options.
So, probability of picking C overall, I am not saying that it is 1. So, given the sequence of
choices that we have made so far, this force us that C is the only option available. So,
the probability is 1. So, here the probability half is given with respect to the choices that
are available. So, these choices that are available are conditioned normally to the
choices that are available are conditioned on the random events that have happened so far.
So, they are given this happening, I have these two choices that are left.
So, given these choices that have happened, I have these two choices that I am doing.
Given these two happened, I have this option. Given that this has happened, I have this option.
So, there is some sort of a conditioning happening. Condition on this event, this event,
I have this happening. So, let us formally define this conditioning and what is called conditional
probability. So, what is conditional probability? So, the notation is as follows.
So, probability of an event E conditioned on F is given by probability of E intersection F
divided by probability of F. The other way to write this is probability of E intersection F
is nothing but probability of E conditioned on F times probability of F. So, this is axiom of
conditional probabilities. So, what does an axiom mean? Axiom is a ground truth.
We are not trying to prove it. We just take using it as a ground truth and then working upwards.
