So, what have we done so far? We have seen the basics of probability, we have seen what
is conditional independence, conditional probability sorry and we have seen what is called Bayes
rule or Bayes theorem right and in all of these we have also seen what are called axioms.
So, let us see more examples of Bayes theorem that we have done last time right. So, let
us look at a question which is suppose a student knows the answer to a question
with probability P, probability P and does not know
with probability 1 minus P right. So, this is a this is a assumption that we have and
probability that the student guesses the answer correctly
is 1 by M for this for a parameter M let us say. So, let us not worry about what M is
right now right. So, now we ask what is the probability that the student knows the answer
the answer is correct. So, this is a question that we will study. So, this is a very simple
problem to state. So, we have a student, the student knows the answer with probability
P and does not know the answer with probability 1 minus P. Now, student can if they do not
know they can guess the answer right. So, they can guess the answer with a probability
of 1 by M. Now, what is the probability that the student knows the answer given that the
answer is correct right. So, let us work it out using the events that
we say. So, let E be the event or let us E be the event that
the answer is correct. F be the event that student knows the answer right. So, now what
we are interested in this, we are interested in probability of F conditioned on E right.
So, why is this interesting? So, if the student does not know the answer there is a probability
that the answer is correct because they can guess the right answer. On the other hand
if the student knows the answer the answer is going to be correct as well. Now, we ask
given that the answer is correct what is the probability that the student actually knew
the answer right. So, we will use Bayes rule to compute this.
So, now I am going to write this as probability of E conditioned on F times probability of
F divided by probability of E conditioned on F times probability of F plus probability
of E conditioned on F compliment times probability of F compliment. So, now let us recall what
each of these things are. So, now let us concentrate on this term right. So, what is probability
of E given F? So, probability of E given F refers to the event where the answer is correct
and the student knows the answer right. Probability that the answer is correct given the student
knows the answer. So, we will actually say that this is equal to 1 right and what is
this quantity? This quantity is what is the probability that the student knows the answer
and let us concentrate on this. So, this is the same as this. So, we know what to fill
here and then what about this? So, let us concentrate on the first part of this. So,
what is the probability that the answer is correct given the fact that the student does
not know the answer right. This is where the student has to guess right. If the student
has to guess. So, this quantity is going to be 1 by m right and what is this? So, this
is the F compliment is the event where the student does not know the answer and this
happens with a probability of 1 minus p. So, overall what we have here effectively is
I have 1 times probability of F is p because student knows the answer and so, again I write
the same thing over here and what I have here is probability of E conditioned on F compliment
is 1 by m times 1 minus p right. This is a simple application of what we call
Bayes theorem or Bayes rule right. So, it is easy to figure out E given F by the other
way was slightly more complicated. So, given that the student knows the answer. So, sorry
given that the answer is correct we want to figure out what is the probability that the
student knows the answer because there are two ways. The answer could be correct with
student knowing the answer and the answer could be correct by student not doing the
answer and guessing. So, we want to figure out what is the probability that the answer
is the student knows the answer and the answer given the answer is correct right. So, let
us simplify this. So, what do what can I write this as this I can write it as m times p divided
by. So, here it is going to be p times m minus 1 plus 1 right. So, this is what we have.
So, this is a example of using Bayes rule to understand the quantity that is unknown.
So, let us look at yet another example. So, let us look at this question 2. Suppose there
is a diagnostic tool or a diagnostic test
that is 95 percent accurate right. So, these days as you have seen with COVID these tests
can also come with what is what are called false positives right. So, the false positive
rate. So, it is occur for 0.5 percent of the population have the disease. So, what are
we interested in? We are interested in the probability that the person has the disease
conditioned on test being positive right. As with the case before it could. So, happen
that the test could be positive, but it could be a false positive right. So, we want to
understand what is the percentage of what. So, what is the probability that a person
has a disease given that the test is positive right. So, we want to understand this probability.
So, again for this we go for this Bayes rule. So, let us say person has in having a disease
I am going to denote it by the event D right and then the test being positive I am going
to write it as P right. So, D is the event that the tested person
has the disease and P is the probability of the test being positive or sorry P is the
event that the test is positive right. So, we will apply Bayes rule for this. So, what
this is equal to? This is equal to probability of P given D right times probability of D
divided by probability of P given D times probability of D plus probability of P given
D compliment times P of D compliment right. So, I would like to differentiate these two
different P's this and this. So, let me just make it right. So, now, what is the what is
this value? So, you want to understand what is the probability that the test is positive
right. So, what how do you get this? So, given the disease what is the probability
that the test is positive? So, we said the test is 95 percent accurate right. The probability
of that becomes 0.95 and then what is the probability of having this disease in the
patient that we are testing right. So, as I said if you look at the demographic of the
population that we consider 0.5 percent of this population have the disease right. So,
if you convert the percentage into probabilities you are going to have 2 zeros before the 5 in the
decimal location. Then I have 0.95 into 0.005 plus then what about the rest? Suppose the test
is positive and there is no disease right what is this probability? So, this probability comes
from the false positives. So, what are the false positives here? The false positives are 1 percent
and here we ask what is the probability that there is no there is no disease right. So,
here it is going to be 0.0 sorry 0.995 right. So, how do you compute p of d complement? There
1 minus p of d which is nothing but 1 minus 0.005. So, that gives us 0.995 right. If you
put both of this together if you compute it is going to be 95 divided by 294. I leave it to you
to work this arithmetic out, but the main point here is. So, we understand how p conditioned on
d is right. We can compute probability of this the test coming positive condition and disease,
but not the other way around right. So, now, for the other way around we use base rule to infer
that. So, we know this, but to get this we actually look at base rule right. So,
let us look at more examples. So, let us look at some funny example.
So, suppose there is an inspector, there is a police inspector who is 60 percent convinced
that the suspect is guilty right. So, further a new evidence comes up.
That tells us. So, what are we interested here? We are interested in what is the probability
that the suspect is guilty given that they are left handed.
So, now, let us write this in terms of events. So, let us say G is the event that the suspect
is guilty right and then I am going to write C saying that event that this given that the
suspect is left handed right. So, what are we interested in? We are interested in probability
of G conditioned on C right. So, we are going to write this in terms of probability of C
given G times probability of G divided by probability of C given G times probability
of G plus probability of C given G compliment times probability of G compliment right.
So, let us analyze these terms individually. So, what is this? So, what is the probability
that a person is left handed given that they are guilty? So, now, this comes from the evidence
that we have. Here it says there is a new evidence that comes up that tells us that
the person committing the crime is left handed right. So, in which case this quantity becomes
1 and if you look at this the probability that a person is guilty will use the information
from the inspector right. So, I have 1 into 0.6 right I can have 1 into 0.6. So, now,
I stare at this expression which is probability of C given G compliment. So, what is the probability
that a non guilty person has this characteristic right. So, 20 percent of the population have
this characteristic which is left handedness right. So, here I will use something very
loosely instead of looking at equality I am going to look at an inequality here. So, I
am going to say. So, let me go bit slowly. So, let me just say that probability of C
is 0.2 and what I claim here is probability of C conditioned on G compliment is at most
probability of C and this implies that probability of C conditioned on G compliment is at most
0.2 right. So, now, I am going to use this knowledge and information to say this quantity
is at most 0.2 right. Now, if I plug this what I will get is this
quantity is at least. So, this quantity is at least this plus 0.2 times 0.4 because this
is obtained from 1 minus P of G right. So, this is the first time we are actually using
an inequality. So, this says probability of C is at least probability of a C conditioned
on G compliment. So, this is the first time we are actually seeing this kind of a statement.
So, let me just finish this and make that statement explicit. So, I am going to say
this is at least 0.2 times 0.4 right. So, if I write this it is going to be 0.6 divided
by. So, here I get 0.6 and here this is going to be 0.08. So, this is going to be 0.68
right. So, this is nothing but 60 by 68 and you can simplify it further however you like
right. So, here we have seen a very interesting fact or we used an interesting axiom that
we have not stated explicitly before. So, we will state it explicitly here.
So, if events E and F are such that E is a subset of F then probability of E is at most
of F right. So, this is an axiom that we would like to use. So, here in the example above
what we have seen is C conditioned on G compliment is a sub event of C itself right. So, which
is why we have this inequality that we are using. So, this is a new axiom that you are
learning right now right. So, unlike all the other cases here we have an inequality.
So, this just says probability that the suspect is guilty given that they are left handed
is at least 60 by 68 right. So, this is what we get by Bayes rule.
