So far, what we have seen is we have seen the definitions of what is called a vector
space and we have seen what is the basis of a vector space through the concept of linear
independence. So, this is what we have seen and then we briefly saw what is called dimension,
dimension of a vector space, right. So, now there is also this notion of a dual vector
space, right. So, we will briefly touch upon these topics and then go back to the system
of linear equations that we were discussing before, right.
Now, so what is the basis? The basis given a vector space V. So, notation is we use the
letters capital U, capital B, capital W to denote vector spaces. So, it could also be
like V1, V2 or U1, U2, etc., right. Suppose V is a vector space that I have, then basis
of V is set of vectors that span all the vectors of V. So, like to be more precise,
I can say linearly span, right, because we are taking linear combinations. So, this is
good. Now, so what we call dimension is the cardinality of the basis, of a basis.
Right. So, this brings us to a very interesting question which is, so can I have, can we have
two distinct bases of different cardinalities? Do think about this question and we will discuss
later in the tutorial. So, let's say we have a basis B. So, let me use this calligraphic
version of B to define the basis, right. So, this contains some vectors V1 till Vn.
So, that means I have the dimension of the vector space is n. So, a shorthand notation
for dimension is we use dim, right. So, that's the dimension. So far, so good. So, now let's
recall our linear equations that we had. So, let's copy these. So, I'm going to just copy them and
paste them. Right. So, now I can actually transform them into vectors as follows. So, I have 2,
4, 1, 1, then I have 3, 6, 1, 2, then I have 5, 3, sorry, 5, 10, 2, and 3.
So, as it turns out, I can actually look at these vectors and come up with a linear combination
that makes them 0. Right. And so, what is that lambda 1, lambda 2, lambda 3? As it turns out,
lambda 1 is equal to 1. So, lambda 1 is equal to lambda 2 is equal to 1 and lambda 3 is equal
to minus 1. This is one of the many constants. So, as I said, so, last time when we discussed
linear combinations, here I said, so, here I have linear combination of this form.
So, any other linear combination here, instead of 1, I could have 10
and things would have still worked. Right. I have infinitely many linear combinations
that will give me the sum of these vectors to be 0. Right. Something same holds here as well.
Right. So, I have these 3 vectors and then that linear combination is going to give me
0. Right. Where all lambda 1, lambda 2, lambda 3 are all not 0.
So, that means the equations were linearly dependent. So, when you have linearly dependent
equations and to be more explicit, if we have fewer linearly dependent vectors
than the number of variables, then we have infinitely many solutions.
Infinitely many solutions assuming consistency. Right. So, this,
there is another way to look at the linear equations as vectors. Right. So, in particular,
these 2, these 2 are linearly independent and these 2 together,
these 3 put together, they are linearly dependent. Right. Good.
So, now the question, like an important question that we can ask is,
what if we have
what if we have n equations, sorry, n unknowns
and m equations
with m greater than n. So, how many linearly independent equations?
So, okay. So, let me be linearly independent vectors. So, I apologize. They should be
linearly independent vectors. Right. So, they should be linearly independent.
Right. So, now what if we have n unknowns and m equations and m is greater than n.
So, the important question is, would all m equations
be linearly independent
or is there an example where
of m equations
that are linearly independent when m is greater than n. Right. Think about this question.
