So, what did we do before? So, we said we have vectors alpha to beta. They can be written
in terms of what we described as elementary vectors. So, now the other claim that we made
was R2 can be covered by 1, 0, 0, 1, and 0, 0. So, henceforth, I am not going to explicitly
write 0, 0, 0, 0, because it is well understood that 0 vector is a part of my vector space.
So, now I can describe any point in R2. So, let us say my point is alpha beta. I can express
it in terms of these two what we call basis vectors. So, the other way to say that is
elementary vectors these two form a basis for R2. So, informally, a basis is nothing
but a set of vectors that generates every other element in my vector space of under
discussion. So, similarly, extending this analogy, Rn is described by n elementary
vectors. So, which are usually called E1, E2 until En. I am going to put a hat, I mean
I am going to put an overline to say that it is a vector. So, what is Ei? Ei is nothing
but in the ith location. So, I am going to write it in the row form and then put a transpose
at the top to make our life easy to describe. So, the ith position, the ith location is
1 and 0 elsewhere. So, this is all zeros and this is all zeros. So, for example, E1 is
1, 0, 0, 0 and so on. Similarly, R3 is given by 1, 0, sorry, I shouldn't put commas there
because we are looking at vectors. So, I have 1, 0, 0 transpose. I have 0, 1, 0 transpose
and then I have 0, 0, 1 transpose or the equivalent is saying 1, 0, 0, then I have
0, 1, 0 and 0, 0, 1. So, writing them as column vectors or row vectors is something is a notation
convention that you follow. So, if you start writing them as row vectors, keep writing
them as row vectors elsewhere, everywhere. And if you start writing them as column vectors,
you keep writing them as column vectors everywhere. So, we stick to the notation where we treat
vectors as columns. So, this makes our life easier in certain situations.
So now, before I formally define what's basis. So, let me define what is called linear
independence or linear dependence. So, what is this? So, I am just going to write the following.
A set of vectors
V1 to say Vm are set to be linearly dependent
if there exists, instead of writing it as there exists in symbolically, I will write
that verbally. If there are constants, lambda 1 to lambda m such that not all of lambda 1 to
lambda m are 0 and lambda 1 V1 plus lambda m Vm is 0.
Right. So, here we say a set of vectors V1 to Vm are dependent if there are constants.
So, if there are constants which lambda 1 to lambda m. So, that means not all of them are 0.
So, lambda 1 to lambda m cannot all simultaneously be 0. So, there exists at least some elements
which are non-zero. If I think of lambda 1 to lambda m as some locations of a vector.
So, this is not equal to the 0 vector on m coordinates.
That means there exists some non-zero element somewhere in between.
So, here the other thing that I want to clarify is lambda 1 to lambda m are real numbers.
So, we say a set of vectors V1 to Vm are dependent if there exists constants lambda 1,
lambda 2 and lambda m such that there is a linear combination. So, expressing vectors,
so just as a related note. So, I am going to say
linear combinations. So, I am going to define this word as well.
So, linear combination of vectors say V1 till Vm. So, any vector that is obtained by
a summation like this where alpha is a constant, where alpha 1 till alpha m
belong to real numbers. So, such an operation is called. So, this is called linear combination
of vectors. So, let us look at things more importantly. So, here all it says is
given a set of vectors V1 to Vm they are dependent, linearly dependent if there exists
a linear combination of these vectors that leads us to a 0 vector. So, let us take some examples.
So, I have a vector 1, 1 and I have vector 2, 2. So, this is a very simple example.
So, for this it is easy to observe that these are dependent because I can come up with a
constant let us say I can set my lambda 1 to be 1 itself or I can set my lambda 1 to be
2 and then I can set my lambda to be minus 1 and this will give me 0 because this part is going
to be 2 and 2 minus 2 to 0. It is a very simple example. You can have slightly more complex
examples. Instead of working with R2, I can work with R3. Then I can have examples of the form I
can have 3, 5, 2 and then I can have 4, 3, 6. Then I can have 7, 8, 8. This is not a very hard
example, but this is also slightly more trivial example. So, this is my V1, this is my V2 and this
is my V3. Are these independent or are these not independent? So, now what do you say?
I want to look at lambda 1 times this 3, 5, 2 plus lambda 2 times 4, 3, 6 plus
lambda 3 such that I have 8, 8 is equal to 0. So, this is a way of writing it. That means
if I simplify this expression, what I am going to get is 3 times lambda 1 plus 4 times lambda 2
plus 7 times lambda 3 in the first coordinate. I have 5 times lambda 1 plus 3 times lambda 2
plus 8 times lambda 3. And in the third position, I have 2 times lambda 1 plus 6 times lambda 2
plus 8 times lambda 3 is equal to what I want? I want a zero vector.
0, 0, 0. So, now I ask, so this is a zero vector. I am going to write it as 0, 0, 0.
So, can we find such lambda 1, lambda 2, lambda 3? As it turns out, it is not very difficult to
find lambda 1 and lambda 2 and lambda 3. So, this is equal to 1 and lambda 3 is minus 1.
Or I can do lambda 1 is equal to lambda 2 is equal to minus 1 and lambda 3 to be 1.
So, it is not just one combination, but there are two combinations that will lead me to zero.
So, in which case, this V1, V2, V3 are linearly dependent.
So, let us take another example, which is I have 1, 0, 0. Then I have 0, 1, 0. Then I have
0, 0, 1. Now, I ask if these are linearly independent or linearly dependent.
So, let us try to look at this example. I have lambda 1, lambda 2, that is lambda 3 is equal to
0. So, what does this give me? I have this vector, which is lambda 1, lambda 2, and lambda 3.
This should be equal to 0, 0, 0. So, now, this will tell me that the only solution that I have
here is in fact, lambda 1 is equal to 0, lambda 2 is equal to 0, and lambda 3 is equal to 0.
So, what would you say the definition of linear dependence was? We wanted a linear combination
such that not all the lambdas are 0. We want lambda 1 to lambda 2 to be not all 0,
and we want the sum to be 0. So, now, this tells us that these three vectors, which I denoted like
E1, E2, and E3, these are linearly independent. So, what do you think would be the definition
for the basis? So, just to give you some insight into it,
Rn can be spanned. So, I will use the word spanned for the first time here by elementary vectors
E1, E2, until En. So, just to make a distinction. So, this E1, E2, E3, and these E1, E2,
En are different. So, these are over R3, and these are over Rn. That means these vectors have
n locations. So, this and this are distinct set of vectors. Good. So, what else can we do?
So, my first, so, what is my basis? So, one indication is it has something to do with
so I will just summarize what we have been discussing so far, something to do with
linear independence. So, what is linear independence? If the set of vectors are not
dependent, then they are linearly independent. So, if they are
not dependent, then they are independent, right? So, it is something to do with linear independence.
And basis should generate the entire space.
Good. So, now, so, what we get from the basis is, so, we are interested in, given a vector space,
this basis is a set of linearly independent
vectors
that span the entire vector space, right? So, just to give you the definition of span,
span of a set of vectors V1 till Vm is the set of vectors that are generated by linear combinations.
For some alpha 1 till alpha m belong to some R to the n.
So, now, what we mean here is, given a set of vectors, its span or in particular its
linear span, so, let me make it even more, its linear span is the set of all possible linear
combinations of these vectors, right? So, now, what I want from basis is that
given a vector space V, basis spans, I mean, so, in the span of the basis,
every vector in the vector space lies, right? So, what is the observation here? Observation is
that this basis is a succinct representation or it is a succinct generator for the vector space.
Right? So, now, there's a unique basis for a vector space. So, you don't have a unique basis
for vector space. So, let's look at the example, which is 1, 0, 0, 1,
1, 0, 1. They have 1, 0, 1. Right? So, let's look at these vectors. So, these are R3, right?
Let's look at this lambda 1 plus lambda 2 plus lambda 3. Right? So, what this is going to be,
I am going to get lambda 1 plus lambda 3. I have lambda 1 plus lambda 2. Then I have
lambda 2 plus lambda 3. And I have each of them to be equal to 0, let's say.
Right? So, what does this give me? So, this gives me, I have lambda 1 plus lambda 3 is 0.
That means lambda 1 is equal to minus lambda 3. Then I have lambda 3 is equal to minus lambda 2,
in which case both of these put together. So, I am looking at the first equation and the
third equation. So, I would get lambda 1 is equal to lambda 2. But if I actually look at the second
equation, from the second equation I get lambda 1 is equal to minus lambda 2.
So, this is kind of a tricky situation and this can only happen. So, only true
if lambda 1 is equal to lambda 2 is equal to lambda 3 is equal to 0. That means these three
vectors that I have, this, this and this are linearly independent. Right? So, we have
linear independence of these vectors. So, linear independence.
So, let me call this vector u 1, let me call this vector u 2 and this vector u 3.
So, you know that even u 2 and u 3 are independent. So, the second thing we can do is do this plan
of the three. So, suppose I have a point that I am interested in, which is alpha, beta and gamma
and I want them to be less. Let's say, I just want to use alpha, beta, gamma because I have
eaten alpha and gamma. So, let's say I have d 1, d 2, d 3. This is this arbitrary terminal.
Right? I want to generate that from 1, 1, 0 plus alpha 2 times
0, 1, 1 plus alpha 3 times 0 plus 1, 0, 1.
So, this is R H I have alpha 1 plus alpha 2, then I have alpha 1 plus alpha 2, then I have alpha 2
plus alpha 3. Right? So, now, can I generate all possible d 1, d 2, d 3 by suitably setting alpha
1, alpha 2 and alpha 3. So, that is what it means to say spanning the entire space.
So, using only these three vectors by using some scalar multiples alpha 1, alpha 2, alpha 3,
I should be able to generate any given point b 1, b 2, b 3 in R 3. So, this is an arbitrary point
that we have picked. For an arbitrary point, we want to find out if there exist choices for alpha
1, alpha 2, alpha 3. Right? So, that is what it means by spanning the entire space R 3 by just
these three vectors. Right? You are generating the entire space because b 1, b 2, b 3 is an arbitrary
point. So, for every choice of b 1, b 2, b 3, I want a choice of alpha 1, alpha 2, alpha 3.
Right? So, then that means alpha 1. So, this u 1, u 2 and u 3 generate the entire space R 3.
So, what is this? I have alpha 1 plus alpha 3 is equal to b 1. Then I have
alpha 1 plus alpha 2 and alpha 2 plus alpha 3. Funnily enough, this is again a system of equations.
Right? So, how do I? So, I can just, I have this, I will call this e 1, e 2 and e 3.
So, then I will say, I am going to look at e 1 minus
e 2 minus e 3. So, this is going to get me
a 1 minus alpha 3 minus alpha 1 plus alpha 2 minus alpha 2 minus alpha 3 equal to b 1 plus b 2 minus
b 3. So, this gets cancelled. Alpha 1 is given by b 1 plus b 2 plus b 3.
Similarly, I can work out what is alpha 3. Alpha 3 is given b 1 minus
b 1 plus b 2 plus b 3 by 2. On the other hand, I have alpha 2 is given by b 2 minus,
sorry, there should be a minus over here. So, b 2 minus b 3 divided by 2.
I can find if b 2 and b 3, all of them zero, I have. So, this is going to be half only like this.
So, b 2 minus b 3 is 1 minus b 2 plus b 3 divided by 2. And this one will be b 2 minus b 3 divided
by 2. So, we get all that we need.
So,
if at least one of b 1 to b 3 is non-zero, then at least one of this alpha 3 will be non-zero.
Please work this claim out. If at least one of b 1 to b 3 is non-zero, then at least one of alpha 3 will be non-zero.
So,
now what does this tell us? This tells us that only this 1, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0,
0, 1, 0, 0, 1. So, not only this is the basis, even this is a basis for
my R3.
So, two distinct bases for R3. So, bases. So, I am just like using it as a plural for
bases. It's a plural of bases.
This tells us that given a vector space, you can have multiple bases for the vector space.
The only properties that we ask of the bases is the bases be contained of
linearly independent vectors and the bases spans the entire vector space. That means if you take
linear combination of vectors in the bases, their linear combination
will actually contain all the vectors in my vector space.
So, here through the example, what we learned is linear combination of this
will give me the entire space which is R3 and linear combination of this will give me the entire
space R3. Fair enough? Good. So, the next question is,
so what we say dimension of a vector space.
So, what is the dimension of a vector space? The dimension of a vector space is,
so in simple terms, it's equal to the size of the bases.
So, dimension of the vector space. So, here we are talking about it in formal terms.
So, let's make that formal in a bit. But so, when I say dimension 3 vector space here,
so R3 is a dimension 3 vector space because it can be spanned by 3 vectors of this one.
Good. So, the number of elements in this bases is 3.
So, when I say dimension 3, then the number of elements in the bases is 3.
