Welcome back. So, we are living at topics in linear algebra. So, what are we looking
at? So, we are looking at vectors, we are looking at matrices and we were looking at
of linear equations. So, this is what we were looking at in the last lecture. So, just to recall,
we were interested in finding situations where you have unique solution, we do not have a unique
solution, but many solutions or you have no solution at all. So, we were interested in
looking at systems of linear equation and we try to gain more information about the system of
linear equations using something called Gaussian elimination. So, we looked at what is called a
Gaussian elimination. So, what was Gaussian elimination? So, we had a system of equations,
let's say we call that 2x plus 3y plus z is equal to 5, let's say x plus 4y plus 2z is equal to 10,
and then let's say I have 4x plus 3y plus 10z is equal to 45. I mean, these are some arbitrary
equations that you could come up with without any thought behind how these equations are formed.
And let's try to apply Gaussian elimination on the system. So, what did we do first? We started
with 2, 3, 1 and 5 and then I have 1, 4, 2 and 10 and then 4, 3, 10, 45. So, this is the system
that I have. And then what can we do in this? We can actually do some row and column transformations.
So, what kind of row and column transformations can we do? So, let's nullify the third equation
using the first equation or the other way around. Let's nullify the first equation using the second
equation. I can do any of these. So, for the sake of this example, let's nullify the first
equation from the second one. So, what do I want to do? I want to replace. So, I'll just number them
as we did before. I'm going to call this R1, I'm going to call this R2 and I'm going to call this
R3. Then I can have R1 given by R1 minus 2R2. So, this is what you want to do. So, what do I get?
I get 0 over here and then I would have 3 minus 8. I would get a minus 5 over here. Then 1 minus 4,
which is going to be minus 3 and then I have 5 minus 20, which is minus 15.
And I can do this other operation, which is into minus 1. So, I can ignore this minus over here
if that's the case. Now, the second equation is as it were, 1, 4, 2, 10, 4, 3, 10, 45.
So, what can I do next? I can actually do the following. I can take R3 and I'm going to replace
with R3 minus 4R2. I'm going to get 0, 5, 3, 15 as they were before. Then this one will be 1, 4,
2, 10. Then what would I get here? So, this 4 minus 4 is 0. 3 minus 16, I'm going to have a minus 13
over here. And then here I have 10 minus 8. I have 2. And then what I have left here is
so 45 minus 40. I have 5. So, what is the next plan of action that I have?
I need to nullify the second element of some row. It could be this. So, basically I'll look at this
and I'll look at this and try to nullify one of these elements. So, what can I do?
So, I'll look at the following. I'm going to look at R1 replaced by 13 times R1
plus 5 times R3. So, what do I get? So, I have 0 and 0 here. So, these two terms don't really
disturb each other. Then I have 5 and I have a minus 13 here. So, this will be into 5 and this
will be into 13. And if I add both of these together, I'm going to get a 0. So, I'm going
to get a 0 here. And what about the other parts? So, this part is going to be 13 into 3,
which is 39. So, this is going to give me 39 plus 5 into 2, 10. So, I have 49 over here.
And similarly, I have 13 into 15. So, what is 13 into 15?
So, 13 into 15 is like 150 plus 45, it's 195, plus I have 5 into 5, I have 25 more. So, I'm adding
this, I'm going to get 220. I'm going to get 220 here. And then I have 1, 4, 2, 10 as before,
and I have 0, minus 13, 2, 5. So, this gives us a new system of equations.
What is the new system of equation? So, just to make our reading better, so I'm going to
recognize these rows. So, I have 1, 4, 2, 10. I have 0, minus 13, 2, 5. And I have 0, 0, 49,
and 220. What do I get from here? I have 49z is equal to 220. That is one equation. I have
minus 13y plus 2z is equal to 5. So, this gives me z is 220 divided by 49. And here I can get a
value of y by substituting this value of z from this. And similarly, I can actually resolve the
value of x from this equation. So, now, so what's happening here is we have,
we can resolve equations by getting this matrix into an upper triangular matrix, sorry,
an upper triangular matrix. So, below this triangle, below this diagonal, you have this
triangle, which is all zeros. So, this is my upper triangle and these are my zeros.
Make sense? Good. So, this is my system of linear equations.
So, then let's consider the equation, which is 2x plus 4y plus z is equal to 1. And similarly,
I can look at this equation, which is 3x plus 6y plus z is equal to 2. And I can look at this
equation, which is 5x plus 10y plus 2z is equal to 3. This is the system of equations I have.
And if I actually look at the corresponding matrix, which is 2, 4, 1, 1, and similarly, I have
3, 6, 1, 2, and I have 5, 10, 2, and 3. So, what can be done? So, I can actually do the following
here as well. So, I have R1, R2, R3. And I can do this transformation, which is
R3 is replaced by R3 minus R1 plus R2. And as it turns out, what I end up getting is
this equation, which is 2, 4, 1, 1, 3, 6, 1, 2, and I have 0, 0, 0, 0. This is the system that I get.
It's slightly not satisfying because I have 3 equations.
But what essentially is happening is these 3 equations are essentially
2 equations because the third equation, if I call this equation E1, E2, and E3. So, I have E3 is
given by E1 plus E2. So, the information that is encoded into E3 is already given by E1 and E2.
So, I have 3 degrees of freedom
and only 2 constraints.
So, this is a philosophical way of looking at it. So, essentially what's happening here is that
there is some sort of a dependence amongst the equations.
So, there is a dependence among the equations and that is giving us. So, what does this give us?
This gives us a system. This gives us infinitely many solutions to the system.
So, what I have here is. So, let's say we are working over real numbers.
So, I have infinitely many solutions to the system. So far, so good.
So, now what else can we do? So, let's study the importance of what is called dependence
of these equations. So, we will arrive at this notion of dependence amongst the equations
by looking at dependence on the vectors. So, let's take a digression and let's look at
what are called vector spaces. So, what are vector spaces here?
So, vector spaces, they are nothing but, they are sets of vectors.
So, let's consider we are looking at n dimensional vectors
in the space R to the n. So, all it means is I have a set of vectors.
I have my ambient space of vectors as in like I have n coordinates. So, rather we have been
denoting our vectors in terms of columns. So, I have this column vector which is n cross 1 matrix
and each of its entry is a real number. So, this is what we call an n dimensional vector.
So, rather let me just. So, I am going to use this n dimensional to just at this point of time
to just say that it has n coordinates. But pretty soon this word dimension cannot be used so
freely as we just did. So, let's replace this by saying n locations or n coordinates.
So, I have a set of vectors. So, this vector space is a set of vectors with some special properties.
So, let me call this vector space with denote by a capital letter V. So, for any two vectors,
this. So, U comma V belonging to the vector space V, we have the condition
that U plus V also belongs to V. So, for any two vectors U and V, U plus V also is in the
vector space V. Further, so we have the following. So, for any vector V,
V. So, and a scalar alpha, alpha times V also belongs to
V. For any alpha which is a real number. So, now this actually brings up an interesting question.
So, if I have any alpha that belongs to the vector space, I can take two vectors which are given by
alpha times V and I add up with another vector which is given by minus alpha times V.
I know that since V is a part of my vector space, alpha times V is also part of my vector space.
And for a different constant, which is, and here I should say any scalar.
So, now I can take minus alpha as the other scalar. Then what would I get? I get 0 as a result. So,
that means my 0 vector is also in V. So, what is a vector space? A vector space is nothing but
it's a set of vectors following some special properties. So, this is what we want.
So, like the entire space Rn is a vector space in itself. So, I can,
some examples of the vector space are all vectors in Rn form a trivial vector space.
So, the entire space Rn itself is a vector space because you have the first property which is
for any vector U and V, where U and V take real values, their result is also going to be
a vector of real values and this belongs to R to the n anyway. And for any vector U,
if you look at a constant and any constant alpha, you have alpha times U
belong to this real space, real vector space anyway.
So, now and also 0 to the n, rather this vector, all zeros vector is part of my
part of my space R to the n. This is a very trivial example of what is a vector space.
And then, what else? I can actually have
vectors with a multiple of, I can just have a vector 0 and I can have a vector U.
Any scalar with a multiple of, forms a vector space. So, geometrically, what does it mean? So,
I have space and I have a vector U in this direction. So, what does a constant
multiple mean? Constant multiple means any vector on this line.
Either in the positive direction, if you multiply with a scalar, positive scalar,
you'll end up with a vector on this side. If you multiply with a negative, you'll get this.
So, I'll call this U, then 2 times U will be 2 times the magnitude of this
or minus U is going to be just the mirror image of this. Mirror image against
a plane which is drawn perpendicularly to U. So, this is not to scale. So,
just to illustrate the vector space that we have.
So, now, just to give you an example of this vector space.
So, it contains infinitely many vectors. Now, you ask, is there a short description of this
vector space? Is there a very short description or succinct description of this space? So,
that is what we want to understand. So, the question here is, is there a succinct representation
to my vector space? So, if you studied this particular example, for me, all I need to do is
just the vector and it describes the rest of the space. So, that is sufficient enough.
So, my question to you is, what happens if my vector space has, take the form of U, I have V,
and I have alpha times U plus beta times V for all alpha comma beta in R2.
So, what is the specific interpretation of this particular vector space?
So, I have, I can draw this, suppose I have a vector like this and suppose I have a vector V like this.
So, what do they come? And let's say vector U and V are distinct.
Or let's come to the point that I'll make the following statement. V is not dependent on U.
That is, V is not a constant multiple of U. In which case, these two vectors, U and V,
are not dependent on either, span the entire space with two dimensions.
So, please see this example.
So, please try to come up with all possible vector spaces that you can think of.
So, now let's come to this notion of what is called
a succinct representation of your vector space. So, which is called the basis.
So, in simple terms, basis generates
the entire vector space.
So, you must have, you must have learned in coordinate geometry of what are called elementary
vectors. So, what is known is, if I take any vector which is alpha beta, they can be generated
by these elementary vectors which are 1, 0 and 0, 1.
So, now how do you get alpha beta? I can just multiply 1, 0 with alpha and then beta which is
0, 1. So, now I claim that if I'm given this vector space over R2,
so here this alpha beta is 1, 0, I mean all other vectors in this R2 space.
So, I claim that if I have, you can have a distance from each other.
What is the possibility of generating all vectors which are based on R2?
Please think about this and we'll come to this part to start up the session.
