Welcome back and let's continue with the Python expression hierarchy that we started
discussing in the last lecture.
So you remember, I mean we already discussed about this basic concept of expression inside
Python. We already talked about how to build simple arithmetic and logical expression
and how to combine simple logical expression using logical, you know, this operator and
you know, comparison operator.
So we were saying that so today, you know, we will, so we already saw about expressions
operators.
So today, we want to discuss something very interesting, which is, you know, you know,
you know, you can Python, which is called assignment expressions. So remember, this is not
assignment, you know, statement in a, in a state, it's assignment expression and we
will see some, you know, subtle differences and why we should be careful in dealing with
this kind of expression. So this is also part of expression hierarchy. We'll discuss it
again, we'll finally, you know, conclude today's lecture with lambda expressions. So let's
move to the Jupyter notebook.
So before we go to the no-worldless operator, which is also, you know, called the assignment
expression. So let's, let me, you know, briefly talk about an important idea, which is
known as operator overloading. Okay. So in Python, like, you know, in many other programming
languages, you can use the same operator symbol for different data times and from the context
compiler or interpreter can actually interpret the meaning of, or this operator is because
you, remember, if you're using same operator in different context, they must have been
a different meaning. Otherwise, you know, it will be invalid, right? So it should throw
an error. But compiler and other, you know, programming languages know from the context,
what should be the meaning for, let's say, these operators.
For a very simple example, let's say, you know, if I want to combine, let's say, two
natural number, let's say five. And, you know, maybe 10 using, let's say, this no plus
operator. So what do I expect? I, you know, expect. So this expression, actually, the expression
that we have written here represents arithmetic expression, right? And it sees, so this plus
operator sees on its left hand side and right hand side, both a number. So from that,
it guess that it's, you know, addition operation, we are talking about here and it will evaluate
accordingly. So if we run it, I mean, what you see here is no number, no 15, right? So
this is what we expected. But we can use the same addition operator and, you know, using
the same addition operator, we can also combine strings. So what you can do is, I mean,
if we, let's say, write print and then, maybe just add. So what we use here is this addition
as a concatenation, okay? So it will just concatenate the first string, you know, behind
the second, you know, the second string behind the first string, right? So this is the
first string. When we combine this first string with the second string, using this plus
operator. So here, the plus operator is not the arithmetic operator, okay? So from the
context that, you know, this plus is trying to combine two strings, the compiler or
interpreter will know that it's not the, you know, addition operation that the programmer
is intending, okay? So it's the concatenation operation that the programmer is, you know,
trying to convey. So let me print it and see, you can see right, what you print here is
a hello one, okay? So this is very, you know, interesting concept in most of the programming
language that you can use the same notation for different, you know, meaning. So, you know,
so here, the semantics of, you know, plus is not, you know, attached to only addition,
but it is also attached to string concatenation and that's something interesting. Not only
to no string, I mean, you can also, you know, concatenate list. You'll see later on that
strings are actually implemented using, you know, list fundamentally, I mean, list is
the, you know, so you, you can, they are similar in the sense that now, if you want to use,
let's say, the same plus notation and maybe we want to concatenate to list. So list lists
are normally represented in this way. We'll come to list in detail later on, but, you know,
these are not a tie and data structures, which help you organize data properly. So, for example,
in your list, you have one and two and then maybe, you know, in my next list, if I have, let's say,
three comma four, and if I want to use to combine these two lists, so I can use the same,
you know, the operator and then, okay, so what you get finally is,
one, two, three, four, right. So we have seen the same, you know, addition operator, which
we knew as addition operator was actually used as a concatenation operator also, right,
for strings and list. Okay. So with this, I mean, I have already discussed what I wanted to
discuss from the previous class, and now let's move to this very interesting, you know, operator,
which was not present in Python from the very beginning. So it was, you know, added very recently
to Python programming language. So this is called Walrus Operator. So it looks very similar to
the, you know, assignment operator, the assignment, you know, statement that you have already seen,
but it's a bit no different. So for example, I mean in normal assignment statement, when you,
you know, look at a normal assignment statement, what do you see? So we have some variable on
the left hand side, right. So this is the no syntax of normal assignment operation, where you have,
some variable on the left side of the assignment, and then on the right hand side, we have some
complex, let's say, expression, which evaluates to some value. Okay. So you can have a complex
expression on the right hand side, which will evaluate to some value and that value will finally
get assigned to this x. Okay. So this, this was the semantic side. We briefly discussed, I think,
in the previous classes. So this is the normal semantic surface, you know, assignment statement,
and remember that this is a statement. So it does not have, so when you, you know, execute this
statement, this statement will not have a value. The right hand side, which is an expression,
which you want to assign to the left hand side, will have a value. But the overall statement
does not evaluate when I say statement, I say this complete thing. Okay. So this will not evaluate
to any value. So this is a no clear distinction when we call it statement, the statement does not
evaluate to some value. Okay. So it's rubbish to just change the state of x, right? So bind x to
the value. But when when we come to this world as operator, we will say that this is, you know,
this not only changes the state of the variable, which appears on the left hand side,
but this whole, you know, expression also evaluates to a value. So, so to be, you know, fully
precise, what we say that this thing that you're looking here is not an expression. Okay. When you
write x is equal to some expression, this as a whole is not an expression. Okay. But when you write,
you know, you replace this assignment with a Walrus operator, the whole thing becomes an expression.
Okay. For instance, I mean, if I have to let's say, if I let's say initiated, you know,
this, you know, data, let's say data is some, you know, data structure like list of some length.
And if you want to know check whether the, you know, length of the data structure,
okay, is greater than 10. And then based on that, if you want to, you know, decide whether you
want to do something or not in your program, then in one go, you maybe you can write, you know,
this thing, this will work. Why? Because, you know, this thing, not only assigns this,
you know, right hand side, which is the length of data structure to n left hand side, but also,
this whole expression, I mean, this expression will evaluate to the final value of n that,
you know, this expression assigns to. Okay. So we will come to it, you know, in the next block,
I will show you some example to tell you clearly what it means. So you can actually, you know,
replace this, you know, assignment with this Walrus operator and then the meaning actually changes.
So meaning changes in the way that now it becomes an expression. So this is an expression.
It both assigns the value of the right hand side, which is, you know, this was the right hand side,
right, of this Walrus operator and it assigns its value to n and it also evaluates to the value,
which is then assigned to, you know, 10, right? Because we will see, I mean,
so assignment cannot be used inside a larger expression. So remember, I mean, this is a,
you know, this thing or, you know, this whole thing that you're seeing here can never be,
you know, used inside an expression and we'll see if you use it, I mean, then, you know,
the interpreter will throw you some error. So to give you a very simple example of this,
let me. So for example, what I say just now, I mean, we can just try to experiment with that,
what will happen if I let's say print? Yeah. So this is a good example is very simple example to show
you. So what do you think will happen when I run this block of code?
So we'll, you know, Python accepted. No, right? It didn't accept it because,
no, what will it print? I mean, you have not given, you know, some value for it to print, right?
And so this was this was a statement in Python and you were not asking it to print. So maybe
when you were writing it, what you intended was print the value of, you know, X, okay? But
that's not how, you know, you can, you know, make Python to print the value of X because it will
say that, you know, this is not an expression. So what it expected inside was an expression and
since you did not pass an expression, it will, you know, throw you another. But what will happen,
let's say, I mean, instead of, so let me open our new block and then go there and
in. So what if I simply replace it with a Walrus operator. So if I now say print X,
you know, Wal, NASA into five and also evaluated to five, then what will this print?
So this is five, right? So what was the difference? I mean, the difference was that I mean,
this is, this thing is not an expression, okay? But on the other hand, this thing is an expression.
And remember expression always evaluates to some value, okay? So since this, this is an expression
and it, you know, evaluates to value five. So that five values, you know, printed by this,
you know, print, come on. Again, coming back to, let me, you know, did not discuss a,
you know, a real example kind of. So the one that we were discussing here, I mean, trying to
hint here. So we'll come to the same thing here and try to discuss it in more detail. So let's
say now you have defined a data structure. For the time being, you know, assume that the data
structure is list, list is nothing, you know, but simple, you know, sequence of lists is,
you know, actually list what you understand. So formally, we will define in upcoming lectures,
but you know, for now, just know, assume that, you know, list is nothing, but, you know,
these numbers kept in this order, okay? So if let's say, I want to, you know,
decide something based on the, let's say, length of list, okay? So let me write down a small piece
of code to make sense. So let's say, so the traditional way to, you know, do branching based
on, let's say the length of list would be to first calculate the length of list, right? I mean,
if let's say I want to decide whether I shall do a set of action or another set of action down
the line in my program based on the length of list. So what I need to do is first to capture the,
maybe length of this list, which is data, okay? And then let's say what I am saying is if my
end, which is nothing but, you know, length of list is let's say greater than three,
then what I want is I want to do something, let's say. Just, I mean, instead of, you know,
writing, you know, complex program right now, let's say, you know, write that, you know, I want to,
or maybe, you know, maybe I want to do, do some thing, okay?
Okay, so this something, you know, can be, you know, instead of, you know, printing that I want to
do something, I can actually write a sequence of statement again here and do something,
but, you know, for simplicity, let's avoid that. So, what do you think? I mean, will it execute
this particular branch? I mean, in this case, when you have instantiated data with this list,
yes, right? Because, any is the length of, you know, this list and the length of list is certainly
in more than three, right? And so, this would print this, okay? So, let me print this.
Right? So, it should, it printed, you know, this, you know, string that I have written here,
it means that if you write a sequence of statement here, that will also get executed because,
you know, program is hitting this particular branch because this condition has become true.
Now, I mean, if you are dealing with, you know, if the only purpose of, let's say,
N is to check, you know, for, you know, checking this condition, in this conditional, which is,
you know, this one, then to some, you know, people, this may, this particular assignment statement
may seem a little bit of an overkill. I mean, why shall I clutter my namespace with so many,
you know, variable name, the only purpose of this variable is to check this, you know, condition.
Okay? So, here, you know, Walrus operator comes very handy. And I think this is the only place
where I am convinced that this Walrus operator can be, you know, more useful than this normal
assignment statement. Okay? So, using the Walrus operator, what you can do is, you can actually
combine both of this and, you know, one line of code and then, you know, you can get done.
For example, I mean, here, what we can say is, we can directly use, you know, this N inside.
All right? So, you can, you know, say it, so instead of writing it on a separate line, outside
this, you know, conditionally, you can maybe, you know, write here itself. Okay? That, you know, I just
know, give me the value of this length. I store it in N. And now, since this whole thing
is an expression, it, it, it evaluates to some value. And what the value is, the value of N that
it assigns. And that can be compared directly with this one. Okay? So, instead of writing two line
of code, maybe, you know, one line of code will do the same purpose. So, no, same job. So, if we run it
now, something again, let me just distinguish it, we can write it like this. You see, I mean,
it has the same effect. So, maybe you can save, you know, one line of code by just, I mean,
it's not saving you even the, in the namespace, because you're using the same, you know, N. So,
you're actually having this N here. So, but it accidentally, I mean, saves you one line of code.
So, no, this was very much debated when this, you know, particular Wallace operator was about to
be added to the Python programming language. So, people debated whether we really needed it or not.
And large segment of people did not agree whether we should add this Wallace operator to the Python,
because it may create, you know, confusion while not creating that much value inside the Python
programming, you know, language. So, I mean, it's your choice, but when, if you're using it,
just be careful. This is what, no, I want to, you know, suggest it. And it may create a lot of
confusion at, you know, different places, which we will, I will show you. But before that, let me,
you know, tell you about some ways in which you can use this normal assignment statement.
So, what are some, you know, valid patterns of these assignment statement is what we are going
to, you know, discuss. So, I will show you some, you know, valid way in which you can, you know,
use this assignment operator. The very, you know, simple way is, you know, already, right, because
we can always assign some value to one variable, right? So, this is the most, maybe simplest way in
which we use assignment operator, okay? So, you use it and it will print you some value. So,
but you can also use, you know, change assignment. So, you know, simultaneously, you may want to,
maybe assign, you know, multiple variables to the same value, let's say in your program,
for some reason. So, you can use assignment operator in that way also. So, that's also valid,
you know, syntax, which is well accepted, you know, inside Python. So, for example,
if instead of only, you know, one variable, if I want to, let's say, you know,
initialize many variables, let's say, A, B, C, all to the same value I can actually do in this way,
okay? So, this is perfectly, you know, allowed. So, here I print.
So, what will happen if you, you know, print, let's say, this, so, this, this, this,
is showing you a chain value, right? So, so, this chain assignment will happen and it will,
show you the value of, let's say, what will the value of A, value of A will be printed and then
you will have no value of B, okay? So,
so, so, if you, let's run this, let me run this piece of code and then,
you see, the value of A, B, C are actually, you know, this five, right? All these three have been
initialized to, right? So, we can also use, you know, this assignment to assign, let's say,
different value to this, you know, variable, maybe you want to, you know, initialize multiple
variables at the same time, but you may not want to give them the same value, right? I mean,
because the previous one was very simplistic where you want A, B, C, all to get value five,
but what if I want to, let's say, you know, give different value to, so, so, you can actually,
if you let's see, you have two variables, you can actually use no tuple, something like tuple,
so, if I want to, let's say, initialize X and Y, both simultaneously and I want to initialize
them to, let's the value one and let's say two, so, I can simply write down this. So, Python takes
care of this, you know, so, these things might not be, you know, available in other programming
languages like C or, you know, other languages, but Python for, you know, gives you this, you know,
freedom to write down a statement like this, this will be considered a valid assignment, a statement
where all the job is done internally by Python to, you know, make sure that value one goes to X
and the value two goes to Y in this particular case, okay? So, again, I mean, we can print and
see whether we get the same value or not. So, let me, you know, let me print it here and then,
let's see whether we're getting what we expected. So, if I want to, you know, print and see,
whether your tuple and packing is working properly or not.
So, will you, what do you expect here as a value of X? Do I get the same value?
So, what is the value of X? So, I'll just print it and whatever the value of Y is.
Okay? So, what do we expect here if you let's print here? So, tuple and packing is no
successful and you see in the X, you have a value one and in Y, you have a value two. So,
this is how, you know, that the semantics of this is exactly what we, you know, discuss right now,
this is same as what, so it does, it automatically. So, what about, so you can have, you know, even more
than, you know, two, right? You can have, you know, three, four, variable, which you want to initialize
because then you can, you know, use this list kind of thing, right? X, Y, G. So, you, one thing,
you have to make sure is that you have to remember the order. Otherwise, you know, you will miss
some things because Python by default doesn't know which one to assign to which one if you don't,
you know, follow the order. So, for example, in this case, if I want to assign X to one, I should write
one first and not, no, later on and Y to, so I should write next to and then three. Okay? So,
then only I mean Python will be, you know, able to print it and assign it this value. So,
you, you have to remember order for sure. Otherwise, you know, you will miss up. So,
instead of topple and packing, let's say, we call it list and packing.
And here what we say is X, Y, and let's say also print this value
and see whether we get what we want. You see, we, we, we, we are getting exactly the same result
that we were, you know, intending to. So, now, let's, you know, get to the other, you know, so one,
one important thing that I wanted to discuss before we conclude note today's, this video,
this is called, you know, great assignment ambiguity. And so, this, this talks about the distinction
between, this is to emphasize the distinction between this assignment statement and walless operator.
So, tell me, I mean, you know, take your time and try to figure out what will be, let's say,
the ether top executing this particular statement. If I am,
we have just seen something like this, right? So, this is like a chain assignment that we saw
just now. So, what will happen if I, let's say, execute this thing? So, is it a valid thing to run?
Certainly, this is a valid thing, right? So, Python will run it and NASA in the value 5 to both
of these. So, this is well accepted, okay? So, what about, no, this statement, what if I write?
And then, if I write, let's say, so what if I, you know, run this line, what do you think
Python will accept it or reject it? So, you remember, I mean, this is an expression, okay?
So, since this is an expression, I can certainly evaluate it, right? So, I can, the value that it
will evaluate to will be the value of x. And, you know, that will be returned. So, this, you know,
right hand side will have value 5 and that will be added to this result, okay? So, this is not
exactly the same way in which this happened, right? Here, you know, it knows that yet it has to
assign this 5 to both of these, but here, some expression is getting evaluated and that's
no slight difference when I write like this, okay? So, you can see Walrus in the parenthesis,
okay? So, this parenthesis has a Walrus operator. So, this is a valid expression.
So, that's how you can actually keep it inside parenthesis, okay? And the effect will be that
this will be evaluated first. So, you will get the value 5 and it will be finally kept to
result, okay? So, so, so, let me actually write down clearly. So, first one was an, you know,
example to show you what we saw just now, which was your, you know, changed
assignment, okay? The second one highlights that the Walrus operator actually gives you an
expression finally and you can put expression inside parenthesis. So, there is no issue. So, if we,
so Walrus in where the thesis is what we want to highlight it, okay? So, if we run it,
again, let me run it and then see whether compiler, so compiler actually, you know,
doesn't, you know, produce any other. So, syntactically, there is no issue at this point of time.
So, can we also write down something like this?
So, what is your, so, what I am, you know, trying to do right now? So, instead of, you know,
Walrus, what we are trying to do is we want to keep this assignment in,
says, okay? So, do you think there will be any issue or when Python will accept it as it is?
Now, if you run it, we will see there is no syntax error, okay? And Python doesn't accept it.
The main, you know, a reason is that, you know, your assignment is inside a parenthesis.
So, you can only write things inside parenthesis if that particular thing is an expression,
okay? So, although you can see the second one and third one looks pretty simple and right,
I mean, this one and this one, but the way they are executed are actually different, okay?
So, whenever there is a Python sees this, you know, parenthesis, it would consider that in
something inside is an expression and would first try to evaluate this expression. And if it is,
let's say, successful in evaluating this expression, then the value that it gets will be allocated
to this result, okay? But since this is not an expression, no, this is an assignment statement,
it will not throw you an error, okay? So, that's why I said in the very beginning, you should be
very careful about the semantics and the working of, you know, these two look very similar looking
things which are called, you know, assignment statement. So, one is clearly assignment statement
and another one is, you know, Walrus, you know, operator which gives you an expression, okay?
Also, you know, some people may, you know, consider this to be a very, you know, dangerous point
because this expression evaluation of the, you know, Walrus expression which, you know,
combines our left hand side and right hand side with a Walrus operator actually has a side
effect on the state also, right? So, normally, we don't want our expressions to have side effects.
So, when you, when a side effect, so when you evaluate an expression, what you get finally
is an expression, but normally, we don't want the evaluation process itself to change the state
of your abstract machine, okay? So, that's something, you know, by default, we, you know,
assume in most of the programming, but in Python, if you are using especially this Walrus operator
in expression, then you should be very careful that it not only, you know, evaluates to something,
but it also changes the state of, you know, machine because it's a signs that value to a variable,
okay? So, both of these things are, you know, done with the same statement and that's why it might,
you know, cause confusion to some of them, but if you're careful, you can use it certainly
for your advantage to say some line of code, which I showed you earlier, okay? So, with this,
we will conclude today's, you know, session and I will meet you in the next lecture where we'll
discuss Lambda expressions. Thank you.
