Welcome back to our discussion on Python's expression hierarchy.
So if you recall from our last video, we have already discussed these three bottom layer
of expressions. So the first one, we define very primitive expressions using different types
of operator in Python programming language. And then we also talked about something called
assignment expression, which is also called Walrus operator. And we saw that it is distinct
from the assignment statement. And that distinction was very much important for writing
semantically correct program. So syntax error are not a problem again to re-emphasize.
If you do some syntax error with these Walrus operator, so somehow compiler or interpreter will
catch this and report you bug. But we have to be very careful about the semantics of these
Walrus operator or assignment expression when we are using it inside any complex,
let's expression. So but again, I mean the status of these assignment or Walrus operator is
expression. So they are valid expression and you can use it at any place where an expression can
be used. Now in our progression of this hierarchy of Python expressions, the last remaining
block is about lambda expression. So in today's video, we will talk about lambda expressions. I mean,
water lambda expressions and what is its relevance and how to use it properly inside Python code.
So without no further delay, let's move to our Jupyter Notebook and we'll continue our
discussion from there. I hope you can see my Jupyter Notebook. So this is the place, if you recall,
we concluded our last discussion. So we discussed this great assignment ambiguity where the
similar looking expressions on which involve assignment statement as well as this Walrus operators,
we have quite differently. We saw that while this second statement was
happily accepted by the interpreter, the last statement that we have written could not be accepted.
And the reason for that was that Python expected something here, whatever was present here to be an
expression, but this is not an expression unlike this thing. So this was the reason why it did not
accept this, but it happily accepted this one. So this kind of difference is a very subtle
and you need to be careful with the semantics to figure out why one is accepted and why another
one is not accepted. So now let's move on to the topic of today's discussion, which is lambda
expressions. So what are lambda expressions? So you can see my cursor. So lambda expressions are
no a way to create small anonymous functions, functions without name as an expression. So
although we did not talk about function to this point, but since lambda expressions are also
expressions, I find it justified to mention it at this point. So if you don't follow some of the
concepts that we discussed in today's video, don't worry. I mean we are going to come back to
the discussion of lambda expression again when we discuss, you know, function in detail. So at that
point of time, you might be able to make sense of, you know, few things that may not be
relatable in this video. Okay. So please, you know, just bear with me and continue the whole video,
watching the whole video. It will make sense mostly, but if you don't follow everything, then I mean
just wait for the lectures on functions and we will revisit these things in much more detail.
So, so just in short, I mean, what is, you know, lambda expressions, they are a way to
implement functions inside, you know, Python without giving functions any name. So that's why
we are calling it anonymous functions. Okay. So, you know, think of it as, you know, quick one time
use functions that you can create on the spot. So normally what happens, if you, if some,
no piece of code in your program, you find it to be very relevant and maybe reusable at
multiple times. We try to define functions, you know, using those course and we say that,
we give it a name. I mean, this block of code, we normally assign a name, which is the function name.
And then we can use those, you know, set of, you know, lines or collection of line at multiple
places, wherever we need that kind of reasoning on, you know, logical calculation, not to happen.
So that's, you know, overall, you know, agenda of defining functions in any programming language,
that if you feel that your code is reusable, normally we give it a name and we use it at multiple,
you know, different places. Okay. But I mean, lambda expression, you know,
just the opposite purpose. I mean, let's say, I mean, if you want to define, you know,
some functions or some set of expressions, which might not be that useful at multiple places,
it may be, you know, used in just one or two, it's a multiple places in the same, you know,
file, maybe. And it's very simple. The logic is very simple. Then in that case, we don't go ahead
and define the whole, you know, function, you know, using and give it a name because that name
may clutter the name space for your whole, you know, Python development environment. You also don't
want to write lots of, you know, names or variables so that I mean, things are available for future
use, right? And there is no conflict between, you know, names. So lambda expressions are, you know,
one such a way where you don't assign normally names to functions, but then functions are defined.
And this thing is called an expression instead of, you know, programming statement, we call,
you know, these are the expression inside, you know, programming language like Python.
So the basic syntax for the lambda expression is, you know, something like this,
where you see, I mean, we write lambda to indicate that we are, you know, going to write a lambda,
no function, which Python should accept as an expression itself. So the whole thing from,
you know, from the beginning to the end is actually an expression, okay? And what's the,
you know, way the exact syntax is you write lambda, which indicates to the compiler that we are
going to, you know, write a lambda function. And then we pass all the parameters for the function,
right? So function always does some computation. And to start the computation, it needs some input
from you, but those inputs are nothing called parameters. So you may have one parameter, you may
have two parameters, you may have multiple parameters, you may pass, you know, more than two
parameters in list or dictionary inside of function. So all of these things again, we will come to
the function discussion and there, we will be very detailed about, you know, this parameter,
but for the time being, I just wanted to highlight the, you know, intention of passing parameter,
because you want to compute something based on some initial value that the user will provide you.
So that's what we call parameter. And then the expression is actually what computes the, you know,
this, you know, complex value or, you know, complicated, you know, value that you want to calculate
for your purpose, let's say. So this is the expression, okay? So let's try to define some very,
very, very easy lambda functions for very simple functions.
For example, one, let's say, you know, we try to, you know, create a lambda function,
which tries to mimic this function, which calculates the square of any given number, okay?
So if you have to, let's say, write a simple function in Python, which calculates the square of,
you know, number, then, let me show you, I think it's visible. So you can see my
Jupyter notebook. So what we have here is, we have defined a very simple, you know, function.
So this is how we define a function, okay? So we said definition. So this deaf indicates that
we are going to write a function. And then we give the name of the function that we are going to,
you know, define right now, so which is, you know, our square function. So we say it squared.
So square is the name that we have chosen, okay? So you can use any name. I mean, you want
to use here to, let's say, name this function. So since square, you know, resembles the intention of
the, or the purpose of the function. So we kept the name square here. And this is the argument.
So inside parenthesis, what you pass is the argument. So normally, when we want to calculate a
square, what do you want? We want to pass one number. And then we want to get the square of that
number, okay? So this is how that, you know, a simple function, like, you know, square is defined,
can be defined inside Python. So do you say deaf square and then pass argument. And in the return
value, so what should you return? You should return X, no, raise to two, right? So you remember,
I mean, this was our notation for exponentiation that we discussed in our last lecture. So
if we define, you know, this function, you will see that this function will appropriately
calculate the square of numbers. So for instance, I mean, let me just copy paste this code
in the code block. So let us copy and paste this in the code block and, you know, try to run it.
So when we run, we see there is no error. So syntactically, you know, this is a valid definition
of a square function that we just now define a very simple function which computes a square of,
you know, any number. So we are sure at this point, since this code block, you know,
run properly, we know that there is no syntax error. But what about the semantics? And we also
check this function, let's say on some simple input, like, what if I call this function on,
let's say, two. So if we call this function on two, should you see, I mean, this is what we should
get, right? I mean, when we compute the square of two, it raised two to the power, you know,
two and which is four. So what about if I change it to, you know, square of, let's say eight,
it returns 64, right? So, so semantically also, this function looks to be a correct implementation
of the square function that we intended to, let's say, implement. So this, you know, one,
no, simple way to define a square function and give it a name. So the square is the name,
right? Whenever I want to apply this function to any argument, I use the, you know, this keyword
square, right? Here I know what, this identified name out, this, you know, function in this square.
Okay. So you can, you know, use it at multiple, you know, places, I mean, wherever, now you want,
you can actually just to calculate a square of any number that you want. Okay. So a square of,
let's say, you know, no, three, what about square of three, square of three? No.
So, now lambda coming back to the, you know, there's lambda expression. So lambda expression
gives you a way to not give this name square to this square function and still be able to calculate
square. So how to define that? So let me know, you know, I mean, we may not, so we may want to,
let's say, give name, but this expression itself, I can be used, you know, as a mean to compute
this square without giving it a name. For the timing, let me, you know, show you in another,
so let me add one code block here and let me know now define our lambda. So we can also,
let's say, this is a alternate, you know, way to define the square function. So what we say is
the square is nothing but lambda and then we pass x and what we return is, you know,
two. Okay. So this is an alternate way to define the same, you know, square function and still
give it a name. Okay. So we have given the square function a name, but instead of, you know,
this kind of syntax where we use dev and then, you know, this return, what we say is, we use
this expression and remember an expression can appear on the right hand side of an assignment,
right? So this is a simple assignment statement that we were not talking in the previous class,
right? Where square is a, you know, a variable that we have created, a name that we have created,
and what we have assigned to it is an expression and what this expression resembles is a, you know,
function. So what's the effect of this expression? So this expression is, you know, defining a function
which takes as an input. So everything before this colon, you can see a colon, right? So between,
you know, lambda and this colon, so everything between lambda and this colon are arguments of the
function. Okay. And whatever you wanted to return, like here, you wanted to return this particular
value, right? Or this expression. So that expression, we want to write here. Note that we don't,
you know, write now this, you know, return keyword. No, that is a result by Python for defining
your function in this particular way. Okay. So you don't need that. So this lambda expression,
you know, is a concise expression also, right? You just write lambda x colon. Okay. So input and
output, no, input parameter and the output expressions are just separated by a simple colon.
And this expression itself is nothing but no function. Okay. So now if you define square in this
way, which is a assignment expression, I don't know, simply said, where left hand side is a,
you know, name that you have defined square and the right hand side is an expression. Okay.
So you will see this will have the same effect. Okay. So now let's say if I,
first let me check whether this is accepted or not. So when we run, you see this is accepted.
So Python does not show any syntax error. So now let's, you know, create a next code block and try
to again apply the same function square to maybe that's the same values. If you want to apply
square to eight, you can see the values 64 and what about no square of two before? Now you might
be confused that I mean we have defined two square, right? I mean one square here and one square
here. So which one Python knows? So since no, this is the last code block we have run. So this is
the value that or this is no meaning of the square that Python considered at this particular
moment of time when I run this no code block. So you know, just remove this confusion. What I can
say is I can know instead of saying square, I can say it's square one. Let's say this definition
and then try to now apply square one to two. So that there is no scope of confusion. So now,
you know, we have only square one and if you, sorry, so you have to run this code block for Python
to know that what is square one? Once we have run this code block and if you now run this
in the square one or two, then this is right. Okay. And similarly, I mean, we again, let's say
run this code black block for Python to remember that the square is no, we find in this way.
And then a square one is again doing the same job as a square, but just for a different name,
we have defined a new, given a new name, but you see, schematically, both functions are same.
You can run it on any number of input and check. I mean, they give you the same, you know,
output because the meaning or semantics of this expression exactly resemble the meaning of a
function. Okay. Okay. So, so now that we have discussed the basic, you know,
the most, you know, elementary way in which, you know, these lambda expressions can be used for,
you know, defining these functions. I mean, we can see some complicated, you know, functions.
So, I mean, here instead of maybe, you know, defining a square one also, let me, let me,
I mean, create another code block. And so what I want to emphasize here is, and if you just use
this expression, okay, and then, you know, you apply, let's say, the value,
because this should come now inside. Okay. So, if you should see, this was an expression,
I, you know, put it inside a parenthesis, and then if I apply value to this expression,
this will give you the same result. I mean, so instead of, you know, defining and giving it a name,
a priority, you can directly also use the same lambda expression to say that, hey, see,
here is an expression. No, that is nothing but a function. And I want to evaluate this expression
with this argument too, because, no, you need to pass some argument to a function too. No,
evaluate it. Okay. So, so when you pass this argument to it, it will directly return you force.
So, you don't even need to give this name square one when you are using this lambda kind of
expression. So, what about, you know, let's check it on one more input before we go ahead.
You see, I mean, we get the same things. So, you know, this gives the, the motivation of using,
you know, this lambda expression that you don't actually need to give any name to the function.
So, you can directly use them. Now, let's try to write some, you know, simple function.
Let's say with multiple input, like, for example, if you want to, now, add, let's say, two numbers,
okay. And I mean, define a function, which is, you know, add function. But now you want to use,
you know, lambda expressions instead of, you know, the normal syntax for function definition. So,
what shall be? So, so, what we want is, let me write down. Now, we want to write,
function to add two numbers. And we want to maybe use, you know, lambda expressions to do that,
lambda to add, no, two numbers is what we want. Okay. So, how to write down a simple function,
which, let's say, takes two numbers as input and then, you know, it returns the addition of those
two numbers. So, we know what operator actually corresponds to addition, right? This is what we
discuss in the last class. But now, instead of writing, you know, function, in this format,
we want to use something like, but this. Now, clearly, there is a difference that you can
initially, our number of arguments were only one. Now, we have to pass two arguments, right?
So, how to pass two arguments? This is what, you know, we want to emphasize, let's say,
no, in this example. So, let me, I know, again, give it a name to the function, let's say, add.
And what we want is to define a lambda expression. Okay. And now, the inputs are not, you know,
input is not only one parameter, but two parameters. So, let me say input to my case is A and B.
And I, you know, separate inputs from output using a Poland. And what is the output that I am
willing to generate here in this case? A plus B, right? So, remember, this, this was, you know,
arithmetic expression to calculate the sum of two numbers, right? So, if we write a simple
statement like this and try to run it, so Python accepts it without, you know, either. So,
you know, so the new syntax that we learned was this no comma. So, we can separate multiple
parameters or input to function by this no comma and pass it to the function and then use a
Poland to separate it from, you know, the output value that you want to generate and the output
value is represented by this expression. So, remember, this is an expression what I have highlighted
here, okay? And, you know, these are the, you know, input values that you pass to this lambda,
okay? Now, we have, you know, successfully defined this, you know, function add using lambda
expression. So, can we, you know, also define another function or let's actually test, you know,
this function once. I mean, if let's say I have to run this function on, so let me, you know,
print and then what if I'm, let's say, adding these numbers, let's say, let's say I want to pass
five, no, I'm plus three, okay? And I want to, you know, see whether I get what I expected,
okay? So, you know, five plus three should be equal to what do we get exactly that when I,
you know, use my, sorry, add function. So, if I pass to this add, now five comma three,
so select the value eight here, if I run it, you see? So, so this is, you know, how we're
sprinting. So, adding five plus three, you know, printing this, you know, resulted in, you know,
this is string, okay? And then this add five plus three, you know, is what it, you know,
so how, what is the definition of this add? This definition is, you know, same as this one,
and it is nothing but a function, which we define using lambda, okay? So, when this, you know,
add is, you know, called with the argument five comma three, you know, which are separated by comma
remember, then it returns the, you know, value a plus b, which is eight. So, this is true, right?
So, that's how, I mean, we know that the function is working properly. So, now can we add, you know,
again, I mean, one simple another example, instead of, you know, add, can you now, you know, quickly
write down, you know, let's say multiply function, okay? Can you take, let's say two input
and multiply them and define a function without using the function syntax, but rather, you know,
using lambda syntax. So, just give it a try, okay? So, if you have to start and define something,
like, you know, let's say multiply, okay? So, multiply is again a function that I want to define,
and I want to take now, let's say two input, which I say X comma Y, you can, could have said,
no, A, B, I'm just using a different variable name for this purpose. And how to make, you know,
valid expression, which represents your, you know, multiplication of these two numbers X into Y,
right? So, this is how we can write, right? And what is the way to check? Just run it and then see,
okay? So, so now, now, comment this line so that, you know, we don't see any other output then just,
okay? So, so this is, you know, well accepted. So, this definition is also accepted. So,
similar to this, we can also print and then see. So, let me copy and paste it, you know,
let's say, you know,
multiply, five, no, into three, maybe here, now gives you what? So, what have we defined right now?
Multiply, right? So, this is the name of the function that we have, you know, given to the
lambda expression, okay? So, this no works as a valid function. So, you can actually use this name
and then pass five comma three and see whether you're getting the same result or not.
Okay? So, so this is, you know, valid result. And hence, we can be, you know, partially sure that
our program is, you know, semantically correct. It's performing exactly what we wanted it to perform.
So, so what we saw right now is how to use lambda expression and, you know, use,
you know, and define, you know, function which takes, you know, multiple arguments, okay?
Again, I mean, as I said, we'd be already discussed that we don't always, you know, need to,
you know, define these, you know, add or multiply kind of name for functions. If you're using
lambda expressions, you can maybe, you know, directly use lambda expression without, you know,
defining these things. Okay? So, for example, I mean, you may mean directly, you know, calculate
these things without even, you know, defining these things. For, for example, let me add a simple,
you know, lambda expression which takes X as input and, you know, gives you the two times X as
our output and directly apply it to some, let's say, number and then print the result. So, we
have done, you know, something like this earlier, but let me do it again. What if, let's say,
I say that I want to, you know, calculate some, you know, value, which I want to store in,
you know, let's say, the result one where I don't want to, so maybe this calculation, I want to do
only for once, you know, we, we are not interested in defining these functions, I mean, and keeping
that at some place. So, what we are saying is we can say, lambda, so we can, you know, first,
so define this nameless function, which is X multiplied by two. So, you now understand what this
function will do, right? This function, this expression, you know, which is in, you know,
indirectly defining a function and what the, the effect of the function is, I mean, it takes
as input X and gives you two times X, okay. Now, what if I apply this function by using this
expression directly to five. So, remember, I mean, you, you, you are, you know, applying this function
by writing, you know, this expression and then followed by, you know, passing the arguments,
which is, you know, only one argument in this case, okay. So, so if we do this, and then if you
let's say, you know, print, if you print the result one, which I have stored here, so what do you
expect, right? So, this is, you know, how you can directly use this expression. Now, without,
you know, we may be defining a double order triple kind of function using this expression,
okay. Another quick, you know, use of this may be, you know, we define, let me just,
for more practice, let me define another value, you know, try to
obtain this result to by again, applying some lambda expression, which is maybe, you know,
maybe adding two numbers, okay. And then passing two numbers directly to it, okay. So,
so,
and when you know, since you have defined this function expression using two arguments,
which are separated by comma, when you pass, you also need to separate them by the comma and then
passing in this order, okay. And what if I print in this case, you know, print the value of, let's
So it is all to what we expect 10 plus 15 should return mid 25 for it to be correct, right? So
you see this is no what we got. So this is just to highlight that you can use Lambda directly also,
okay. Now we go to the next concept which maybe slightly now complicated concept for many of
you who are not so familiar with you know functions, but you know let me give it a try and you
also focus on these you know particular examples which I know I'm trying to discuss under this example
4. Lambda's with higher order function. So the concept of higher order function is that you know
functions can be passed as an argument to functions. So it's not like till now I mean we were
defining some no primitive functions we were always passing some data or variable as argument
to functions, but no in Python functions are like first class citizens and they can be placed
anywhere where a simple argument or a variable can be placed, okay. So this is called higher order
functions. Again we are going to come back to this thing in much more detail when we talk about
but just to highlight I mean how Lambda expressions can be used in different ways we will just take you
know maybe one or two example of these map function and filter function which are already know
available inside Python library. So map is you know one function which works on lists and tries to
apply you know similar kind of operation on all the elements of a list, okay. So so map is very
frequently used to you know function available in the standard library of Python to transform the
values in a list in a certain way, okay. So if you want to let's say transform a multiple values
so all the values inside the list in a particular way let's say your list has multiple number and maybe
you want to compute the square of those numbers. So instead of going to each of these locations and
doing this square applying this square function this MAC function at once I mean can apply this
kind of you know square to all the values in the available in the list. So you know this helps you
get rid of multiple you know looping and that kind of construct we will discuss you know later on
but it's a very simple and you know elegant way to implement you know many list operations which
require you know similar kind of operations to be applied on different you know elements in a list.
For example I mean without getting into the detail of how you know this map is implemented let me know
try to work out some example which will give you no again partial semantics of where this map and
how maybe no lambda can be used effectively in combination with this map operator. So for
example let me you know create a list of let's say numbers, okay. So let me you know begin with
the clicking very simple list where the list has you know numbers like one two three four maybe five,
okay. So let's have the list has you know this five number and you know using the you know
map now I want to so what what we do is first let's say define a simple you know transformation on
these numbers let's say I want to add or maybe five to each of these numbers, okay.
In a sense so we define a simple function maybe without using let's say lambda first do it so
we define a function whose job is to just add five let's say this is the job of the function, okay.
So the function takes an argument x, okay. And what it returns is returns is
five, okay. So this is a simple function that we have you know define, okay. So when you
use this ad function and you know pass it an argument x what will it return it will return x plus
five. So now using the map you know function which is an inbuilt function inside Python,
you can actually add five to all the element of this list that we have defined by using one line
of you know command. So let me write down this one one line of command. So let's say if I want
result of not this map applying you know the map function on this list to be you know stored here.
So what I say is I know I say I will apply I will know map all the values in the list two new
values using a function, okay. So first you know map has to be you know passed. So there are two
arguments to map that normally we pass. And the first argument is the function or the operation that
you want to apply on each of the elements on off list. And the second argument will be the list
itself, okay. So you have to give pass both these things, right. What kind of operation you want to
apply on each element on the list and what is the list, okay. So there are two elements that you
want to you know provide to this you know map function. So the very first thing is you know
add five is what we want, right. So this is the kind of transformation we want to make on each
of the element of the list. So we pass here you know add five. And then we also need to you know
provide you know what are the what is the list on which we want to apply this, okay. And just
no for no to be sure that whatever we you know or get is again a list finally I mean I just write
this no thing. You can check you know even without writing this list but let's say for safety I want
to ensure that no whatever I return and finally get is also a list, okay. So if I run this piece of
code what happens. I mean there is no syntax error, okay. So it's of the no interpreter has
accepted this code. But again I want to check whether what I have defined right now gives me
correct results, okay. So I would like to print what is this no result map that I have calculated
using you know this map function and that for I had five function and this number list.
So let me not do that. Let us try to print and see whether know what we just calculated makes
sense or not. So when you are going through these videos I mean please try to make sure that you
open the Jupyter Notebook and then play around with the code. So this will give you no confidence
writing code on your own and you know getting the correct semantics of what we are discussing
right now, okay. So what we are saying is we want to
do. Okay, so sorry, so this is what we want to be a print and see whether so what do you expect.
I mean so what is our expectation can we write our expectation before we run this piece of code.
So we wanted to add write something to all the number in the list right. We wanted to add
five to all the number in the list. So what should be our expected result? We would like six.
No, seven, eight, nine and ten. This is our expectation and now we should try to run it and see
whether our expectation meets the actual computation or not. Okay, so let me run this
piece of code and you see this is what no we get. So you know, cementically the code looks to be
correct. Okay, so this is how you know you can use the map function. So what we discuss just now
is only you know the map function and how it works. But now can we get rid of this function name
not define a no complete no function name here by using lambda expressions and is still be able to
do the same sort of job. Okay, so can we do that? So let's actually try to know write another
statement which again, you know, calculates the same, same, you know, no resulting list. But
you know, without maybe using these function add five and maybe using, you know, just lambda.
So let me call it with a different name, let's call it result map and this time what I want is
to use lambda. So that's why I have given I know meaningful name to indicate that this time
we are not using the add five function that we have defined initially to calculate this kind of
know things or transformation on a list. So what I want is I mean, let me copy the code from here.
I mean this exact thing we want to copy from here and maybe paste here. And what we want to do
is to get rid of this no add five. Okay, so this is our goal. Let's say we don't want to use now
this add five instead of add five because add five is a function right which can be represented
using a lambda expression we have seen right in previous cases how to not write a function name
and it's still be able to compute the you know, effect of a function using this lambda expression.
So can we get rid of add five here and write some meaningful lambda expression which will have
same effect. Okay, so so let me now help you with some, you know, hence so how to write a
no lambda expression which takes as an input x and returns to x plus five that should do the job
right because that's what we want to do here. Okay, so how to do that so let me so we certainly
need to bypass the second you know number but here in the first one we can be a little you know
creative and what we can say is instead of you know passing the function my
way directly pass you know this expression which is no lambda x colon x plus five.
Okay, so you see this expression.
If you try no use this expression instead of you know this name right add five and applying
on this number. So first let's see I mean whether Python except is as a correct syntax or not.
So let me run this piece up. So when we you know run so let me also you know comment out this
code so that you don't see anything else. So now you see I mean this code is you know so this
is well accepted right so Python accepted the you know previous code modified by this lambda
expression. So this is a perfectly valid syntax but then what about the you know mini semantics
LV also check by applying again on the same no same thing whether I'm this thing work. Okay,
so let me copy and paste no the same thing here.
So let me copy paste this thing.
Okay, now in this case so what we're saying the map result may be you know
with lambda may be lambda. Okay, so what we have applied is in this case lambda and we are not
outputting result map but result map that I calculated using lambda right. So this is what
we have calculated it now and we expect again I mean the same thing right. So shall we print it and say
let us know or run this thing and you can see we get exactly same result right. So when you know
uncomment let's the previous print also maybe here and then run both now it will be not clear.
So you see so the map result is 6, 7, 8, 9 and you know map result with lambda is also
so in a nutshell what we have seen is that you can use this map functions very efficiently
with lambda expression and without you know using this add 5 because this add 5 was only
for this temporary purpose maybe. Okay, so if that's the case why to define a new function and give
it a name not only for this no purpose. So instead of doing that what we do is we don't define it
if we don't define this thing.
So let's continue with the lecture.
Okay so
So that's what we wanted to discuss here that we can use and very cleverly with
a map to this kind of thing. Now let me go to another very commonly used, again I mean standard
library function which is called filter which we again use on a list. So the job of filter is to
filter out some of the elements of a list based on some condition let's say. We know how to
write condition like we have seen some expressions, these Boolean expressions, logical expressions we
can help us write down some to check some conditions. So here in this case again I'm maybe I just
no copy paste the same number list. Okay and maybe just enlarge it with six, seven, now eight,
maybe nine and ten, put some more numbers so that we when we filter we get some number at least.
And let's say in this case I want to filter only the even numbers okay so we want to only filter
even number and how to do that I mean again a very simple way to do that will be to define a
you know is even function and use that function or with this filter okay and get the filter done.
So so let's say I mean first attempt again we give using a name function. So in this case I mean
if I have to define some function meaningful function which is the same job then I would most
write the name as is even and then we take the value x and when we return what we return is
you know x it was a you know modular division I think so we define by two right so modular division
two gives you zero if it is even right so we return now can you make sense of this expression
that I'm returning it this is modular division by two and modular division by two will return
you zero only if the number is even right so the the whole expression that you are you know
returning here is actually a Boolean expression right so finally you will return either true or
false okay so if you don't recall I mean please go back to the previous know video and check
what this expression means I mean this expression finally will evaluate to either true or false
and it will evaluate to true in the cases where your no modular division gives you
zero and that will be true only when it is even okay so we already have a you know function which
takes you know any x and it turns true or false based on whether that x is even or not okay so this
is a very simple you know implementation of function using a no Boolean which returns a Boolean
kind of thing and now I can actually use this function to let's say collect maybe all the
even numbers which is you know present in this you know initial list so what I say is I want to
apply this filter and what is the filter that I want to apply so my filter is is even function okay
and what I pass is this no list of numbers so when I do this I collect all the you know even
number in this one and again just to make sure that I you know finally get a list I write here list
okay so when I when I apply this again the first argument is the filter function which is
you know is even which will tell us whether the number is you know no true or false no number
whether this no check returns true or false and the second one is the whole list of numbers on
which we want to apply this check okay so finally we get is no set of even numbers okay now
now let me no copy paste to see whether
so we have already applied this and what we want is to check whether this thing is correct or
no the semantics of this should let me a print or even numbers and no which are you know in this
even happy
now can you see I mean when we run this code we get to 468 and 10 and all of them are even number okay
now what what about now applying the same thing with you know lambda so let's know
attempt to do this without defining a new or you know function is even but instead you know
I want to use now lambda expression to do the same the option what I am intending to do is that
I am trying to implement this filter with lambda so what shall be the code so can we write down
the code for just opposite maybe maybe you know let's just calculate odd now instead of
even if I have to calculate now or I mean this return all the odd numbers so how to
know return it so maybe you know write this no odds here all the odds want to return
and what about know the filter let's say apply filter and we will write something you know
here right in the beginning we will write something and then finally we will apply you know
this check function to and you have be a number okay so this is what we want so we have to
fill this gap I mean what shall we write here so this should be a check now which we should
be able to check whether given number x is odd or not so what shall we return if a number is odd
so moderate division should return of 1 right instead of a 0 if it has to be odd can we write
you know lambda expression for that so so if we write lambda let's say x is my input and then
what I want to return is whether x modular division you know 2 is equal to is equal to 1
remember I mean here I mean in case of even we wanted this to be 0 right but here in case of
odd number I want it to be 1 okay so I return now this thing and just again to make sure that I
get a list I just know or app it in this list thing and what if I you know run this so even numbers
is you know we got printed from the previous one but if you know print again you know these odd
numbers let's say whatever we have collected in this now odds if we again print it here let's say
let me write down this now if you print all the odd numbers which is not collected in odds what do
we get here you see we got the same you know we know 1 1 3 5 7 9 these numbers which are actually
odd number so everything is no working as intended so we we have seen how to use a map and filter
together with these lambda expressions and they're very you know convenient to use whenever you
have something like this now I will conclude today's lecture with a slightly you know maybe you know
complicated you know lambda expression but it's good to think about it because this will make
the semantics of this lambda expression far more clear for you on the other hand if you don't
follow this please no don't get demotivated we'll come back to it when we discuss again functions
so what we are going to discuss now is no something what we call a function factory okay so now what
I want to do is I want to define a function which will return functions okay so this is in
different than what we have been doing till now so I want to define a function which you know
returns different functions based on what we want let's say I want to create you know many
functions which you know jobs are to multiply a given number with some number so let's say I
want to create a function with a name double which I whenever given a number creates develop that
but no I also want to you know create a number which let's say no triples number so so let's say
name that number as triple so that number give whenever given as an argument creates no triple
of that similarly I may want to create no one function for each of these kind of no thing I mean
this may look very artificial to you but no I for example to be very simple let's say keep our
function also to be very simple so I want to maybe you know create you know this you know
multiplier functions maybe and I want to do it using a function itself so okay so I want to
maybe write a function whose name I may want to give create multiplier and I have to give no by
what factor you know this you know new function that I return should multiply a given number so
that should be the factor one argument to this multiplier function and the final output that
this multiplier function gives is a function itself okay which will return the you know function
which is you know it useful for me to you know multiply a given number using that factor so so
let me I mean write down you know in a very you know if you know first attempt of writing such a
function so what we want to do is we want to maybe you know define a create multiplier
multiplier function which takes a factor as an you know input okay and the whole job of this
no function is to define a function okay so inside this function what we do what we want to
actually do is we define another function which we are calling let's say let's say multiply here
okay and multiply x okay so what the multiplier x does is it just returns
it just returns x multiplied by this factor okay and what my you know original function returns
is just this multiplier okay so what is multiplier so where did we you know so how can we return
something like this because that thing has been already defined inside my function okay so what
this create multiplier takes from you know outside is this factor and once it knows the factor it
actually returns a whole function and the you remember you see this factor is used inside the
definition of this multiplier function so just go through it slowly I mean if possible if you
you know feel essential stop the video and think about what's actually going on here what is the
input of this create multiplier function which is a factor and what is the output of this no function
which is again a function itself okay now I want just to make more sense I mean I want let me
I mean give you some concrete example let's say if I want to create a no function which let's
say double you know whatever you give then what I will say I will say create instead of you know
defining it a fresh here I can also define it you know in a completely fresh way right using
expressions or whatever you want but I want to use let's say this create multiplier
flyer okay and what's a live pass to the create multiplier
two right so when I pass it to two it will create a you know multiplier you know function
which will multiply by two and it will give it a name or double so double now becomes my function
which will you know double whatever number I give to wait okay so for example I mean let me
immediately maybe use this double to apply it to some maybe number and then
so let me
so maybe print you know double and apply double this number on 5 so what do you get what do you
expect here so there is some error so double is not defined okay so there is no mismatch in
the way I have defined double so okay now if so the double of 5 is 10 okay so can I also define
your triple I mean in same way this is triple now as we discussed in the very beginning that
this number should be able to so let me you know copy paste this one
and then say that now I want to do different triple and what if I you know want to print what
is the effect of my triple let's copy and paste it here instead of you know double
now I want to print the triple and using this triple function okay
triple function so what do you expect here see I mean we are getting exactly if we wanted right
so we can create double triple and these kind of things and you can create no you know 10 times
hour you know if you want to let's say define a function which is you know multiply it with 10
times you can also say create multiplier and pass 10 like I mean let me create it and not use it
maybe you want to multiply now with 10 so take you may so this time stand once there is nothing
but let's say create multiply and then you pass it 10 you can also again check you know using
the same method whether you know you can so again there is some error
maybe you know some spelling mistake so I just copy it and paste here here okay so this is how
you can create this no function but again if I ask you can you do it without defining this
inside it okay so what we did here was now we we outputted no this multiplier function but before
outputting this multiplier function we created this you know multiplier function inside the main
function that you know was creating all this no function okay so can you get rid of you know this
what I have highlighted here you know so let me you know copy this whole you know code and what I'm
trying to ask you is copy and paste it here now what I'm trying to say is I mean can we do
by not having this you know defined explicitly here okay so this is what you know we want to
see and you should be able to guess you know what what what shall I do I mean if I don't want to
define the function inside this you know main function no the whole no purpose of defining
this multiplier here no is to use it here right in the return can I not define it here and still
you know use something similar here in when I'm returning okay so so what I'm saying is I let's
say if I comment these two lines of code and I still want to get the effect of multiplier here
what shall I do I mean you should be able to guess at this point that we can use lambda expressions
you know effectively to get rid of this definition inside the function okay so what about I mean if I
right so what was it no job of this lambda function that you the function multiplier that you
have defined inside x just to you know multiply that x you know with a factor right so instead of
that we can also say this right that you take x as an input and then you return x multiplied by
factor which you already know right because factor has been passed to you so if we use this
expression you can see this expression has the same effect as this you know function okay
so instead of you know returning that you can directly maybe you know return this thing okay
and if I now try to run things and see whether I get the same result you see you get the same
result it's a valid you know definition accepted by python and also the results are as intended okay
so this is a perfectly you know correct way to do this so we could get rid of one definition of
function inside this one now a third you know even more you know clever way to do you know
something similar you know can be you know different I mean so what we are asking now in the
third attempt is to can we you know instead of defining this function in this way can we define
it using no lambda expressions so this is what I'm not asking you here so what what we are saying is
no can we comment out all this code and then create multiplier using lambda expression because
remember what we have written here is also a function right this itself is a function which takes
you know some input what is the input that it takes factor and it turns to this function so can
you know instead of writing this whole thing I mean this definition in this definition of
function in this form can we convert this also as a lambda expression okay so this may look a
little bit tricky to you at this moment but try to think about it I mean since it's a function
we can always create a no nameless lambda expression out of this function okay so what I'm trying to
say here is I mean is this a valid thing to do let me write it down so create maybe
create multiplier okay so you see I mean you know I instead of defining this create multiplier
function in this format which is normal no syntax for defining any function what I'm saying is
can I define this create multiplier as a variable and then assign it some lambda expression which
will have the same effect as if no we have defined the function so so what shall be the lambda
expression then okay so the argument is no factor okay and so so this is no you see I mean
the the argument was factor and what was the return type so what was the return value you see
return value was a lambda expression itself okay so after colon or maybe you know we can copy
from here exact thing right so what we want to return and for safety you use a parenthesis and
then you know pass this do you see this is no valid one-line you know statement which again
defines the same create multiplier function which will it should have the same meaning it from
our discussion till now it's easy to see why no this is true okay so let me run this and see
whether compiler accepts it without an error so certainly I mean it no accepts it without an
error but what about again now if I want to not define like I mean if I want to just copy and
paste this three line of code here just to check whether the semantics is also as intended
because syntax wise it's perfect but what about semantics do we get the same semantics so let me
run this piece of what again I know with this and you see the same meaning right so lambda expression
can be very helpful in concisely representing function expressions and especially when you're
using it no for maybe only one time and you know in cases where the function definition is not
that complicated that you want to maybe write comment for describing it and especially if it is not
reusable maybe you want to use it only for one time in that case also I mean you can simply use
this lambda expression and avoid defining any new function so just to you know summarize the
whole idea we want to know answer this question I mean through this lecture we try to answer this
question that when would you use lambda expression okay so using lambda you know expression is you know
perfect you know in the cases you know where for example you want to do calculation very
no quickly okay so the very you know first thing is that if I want to do some no quick calculations maybe
since then I have to know pray for this in our lambda expression also the kind of transformation
which I want to capture with this lambda expression should be simple I mean it you should not
know use lambda expression for very very complex transformation in that those cases it's better to
define your function explicitly because that will no be more direct way of you know saying what
you want to do rather than you know defining this complicated lambda expression so another thing
that we would certainly want is that the transformation that we are trying to you know express using
this lambda expression should be simple okay so we shall always write lambda expression for simple
transformation you know another thing I mean that is you know important in that we discuss that you
know if you know transformation that you are talking about right now is not reusable at multiple
places it's only you know mean for one time maybe operation in that case again you can prefer
using lambda expression over function so the third core criteria that you know that will help me
to use lambda expression is one-time operation if no the operation that you want to perform or
not define is a one-time operation then you better use it when to you know you use regular
function so I mean when your logic is very complex let's say it's not very easy to define it in
no one although I mean you can always define it in no terms of lambda expression but the expression
may be very complex to make sense of so when your logic is complex you should most mostly know go
to the regular function okay and define it using the syntax of the regular function so the very
you know first you know kind of thing where I get a hint of you know going to regular function is
no complex logic if the logic is complex better you know stick to regular function then I mean again
I mean as we discussed previously I mean if the code has to already the function has to be used
and reuse at multiple places in multiple files you know and then you must actually define it
explicitly and give it a name because then that you can use that name multiple times in
no different places okay so the next important thing to note is that you know our
so you should write function when the code that you want to you know reuse multiple times okay
so the code that you will reuse many times you better write functions for that and of course
I mean code is you know reusable and logic is complex and when you want a clear documentation for
that you certainly should use that okay so believe I mean let's you know suppose that your code is
to be used by some other third party you know then you need to give the documentation of the code
also very clearly and you cannot provide documentation inside a lambda expression okay so for that you
need to write a proper function and also put enough documentation so that someone who is using your
code should not be forced to look inside the implementation of the code rather than it can just
look at the description of the code and use that code okay so if the code is meant for third party
and if you want to document the code clearly then also you should define your you know functions
using proper you know function definition so this is a moment you need clear documentation
so these are some of the places where I can you know advise you to use lambda expressions
and functions you know judicially based upon what's the current scenario okay so with this we
would like to you know conclude this lecture I will see you in the next video thank you
