Hello and welcome back to Python, Core and Applied Concept for Reliable Data Sence Workflow.
Today we will continue our discussion of Functions from nowhere we left in the last class.
So if you recall, in the last class, our main topic of discussion was default arguments,
or Functions. So sometimes we may not or I mean user may not want to call the function by
explicitly giving you all the values of the function parameters. So some of the function
parameters, most of the time may expect the same value. So in those kind of situation
where Functions can be called, you know, using your argument, it's good to make some of
the argument as default argument. So the nice thing about default argument is that it's not
that you cannot provide value for those default arguments, but it gives you this additional
flexibility of not providing that value every time. Okay. So if you don't provide that value,
know, at some function call, then by default function, this no function call is free to assume
some default value for that kind of parameter, which we call default parameter. So we talked
about this. We saw some of the advantages of using this default argument like this flexibility,
that one, you know, that we talked about, that function can be called with your argument,
then readability. I mean, if your function, you know, call, let's say, includes fewer arguments,
of course, I mean, it's far more, you know, readable, right? Your code does not every time has
all these no extra information, which may be, you know, guessed by default in most of the cases.
Okay. So at multiple places, your function call may look much simpler than what it could be,
if you have, if you are, let's say, first to pass every argument, every, you know, other time,
when you call the function, okay? And so, so this is the reason that we discussed, I mean,
we use these default arguments. And one reason was this backward compatibility also, right? And for
this, I took some, you know, example and showed that how this, you know, backward compatibility can
be an issue. So when you have written a function, which has already been, let's say, used in
many applications of many other, let's say, developer. And now you want to, you know,
make your function more efficient, or maybe you want to add some new feature to your function,
you know, which maybe, you know, in terms of some new argument passing, some new argument,
then how to maintain the, you know, already developed code, which was developed based on your
function, not to, no break. I mean, how to, you know, prevent breaking those, you know, existing code,
in the presence of the update or upgrade you want to do for your own code. So this was
what we call backward compatibility. We don't want the existing code to break when you upgrade
your code using some, or adding some new feature by introducing some new parameter. So in that case,
also default arguments were very, you know, nice way to deal with. And we, we saw one example,
also it, this process dot example, where we explicitly talked about what was the problem.
And what will happen if you don't have this feature of default argument, and if you just
increase argument while one, all, you know, future called to the function in the existing software,
actually break. But if you put it as a default argument, then even those functions will, you know,
work as, it is those, for example, will also work as my expected. Yes, this was our discussion
in the last class. So let's continue our discussion of, you know, default argument for,
for a little while, and then we will go to the next topic. So we know why this is important,
right? In the real project, and we also learned about how to use it. But, you know, there may be some
confusion while using default argument, if you don't know the exact semantics of how these
default arguments know work in Python, okay? So it's important to know the exact nature of this
default argument. And it is a little bit different than, you know, other kind of, you know,
function definition and function call. So as I said, I mean, in the beginning that when you define
a function, you're just defining the syntax, right? And when you call that function, then the
semantics come into picture because at that moment, the function, you know, gets executed or
the execution of the function is start, okay? So you define function only once, and then you call
that function at multiple places, right? So in that sense, I mean, you're again, and again,
trying to, you know, invoke that function and execute the same code that you have written earlier
at, let's say, one separate place or, you know, in a separate fight. So with the default argument,
I mean, it is very important to keep in mind that the default argument, you know, value that you
assign while defining the function using this kind of expression, these only evaluate once.
I mean, when the function is not defined and not at every, you know, function call. I mean,
so this might be a little counter, you know, intuitive or, you know, not so normal. I mean,
in the context of, you know, function definition and its call, but I want to, you know, highlight this
specifically because it may cause a lot of error. I mean, it may be root cause of many of the
future errors that you may introduce in your code without realizing, okay? So in Python,
this is what I want to say, you know, say in Python default arguments are evaluated at the time of
a function is defined and not when the function is caught, and this is very, very, very important,
so when you are defining your function at that time itself, I mean, this, you know, expression,
which you want to assign to default argument, you know, gets evaluated or executed, okay?
So once that's assigned, I mean, you know, so next time I mean, when you call again the function,
it's not that this, you know, evaluation of this expression will again take place and then it will
be assigned to this default argument, okay? So, so function call may have multiple arguments,
what I am, you know, mentioning here is only the default argument because you see, I mean,
this is how we, you know, indicated that this argument is default argument by, you know,
assigning some value, some expression to that default argument, okay? There may be multiple other,
you know, arguments, but what we are right now saying is when a function call have some
argument and some of them are default argument, so when you define the function at that moment,
itself, that expression, you know, gets evaluated and assigned to this default, you know, parameters,
okay? So this is very, you know, important and we'll see, I mean, some, some example where you can
be, you know, observer did no difference in behavior than what you might expect in the usual case,
so this means that the expression used as a default value is executed once and the resulting
object is stored as part of the function object itself, okay? So, so what happens when you define
something like this? So, Python evaluates this expression and at the time of the definition,
itself, I mean, once you define and compile this, this happens, it will, evaluates to expression
and then stores the evaluated result as default value for argument, this argument, this particular
argument which you intend to be a default argument, okay? Then it, you know, in all other
next, you know, function call, it does not again evaluate this expression and you know, put it in
this one, but instead it uses the same, you know, expression that it has assigned to this argument,
you know, in the very first time when you compile this function, okay? And so one of the,
you know, important implication of this is that, you know, because the default value is
reused across function call, if your default, you know, if your expression for the default,
you know, argument are mutable, you know, data types such as list, dictionary or set,
this can lead to unexpected behavior, okay? Any modification to the default object persists across
subsequent calls, okay? So you cannot, so let's say, I mean, if the default argument has been
initialized to some mutable data types, like list, for example, I mean, let's the very simplest
kind of, so let me, you know, talk in context, I mean, just by writing maybe some, you know,
function, so for, for instance, I mean, let's say if we want to write a very simple function,
which always adds something to a list kind of container, okay? So, so my, you know, simple function
may look something, you know, like this, so let me, you know, define it, so let's say, define a
function and let's call it, you know, add item, okay? And what, what, what I do is this add item
actually keeps adding, you know, items to, uh, already, let's say, you know, existing list,
which user may not want to give you, you know, every time, okay? So, by default, it, you know,
it, it expect you to, you know, create, let's say, that list, as an empty list, in the beginning,
okay? So one way, so one way to think about this function is, like, so we want to pass the item
that we want to add to the, you know, list or the container, so let's call our list here container,
now which contains all these items, okay? And I, uh, by default, let's say, if you don't want to pass
every time on this container, I, what I say is, I mean, I make it a default argument and
initialize the value to the, to, to, to be our empty list. So this is the default value as an
empty list, okay? Now, uh, what happens when I, uh, so I have not defined the complete function,
so let's make call it a container. So the main body says that now we want to
append this thing, the item that came to us to this container, this is what I want to do right now.
And then maybe I just want to know, uh, return the container, okay? So this, this may be a very
simple function, okay? Now, uh, the calling, uh, this function,
multiple time without providing container, uh, explicitly should also work, right?
And what do you expect? I mean, if you don't provide, you know, container, uh, naturally
after seeing this, you know, definition and attending the last lecture, we would, you know,
start to believe that container will be, you know, initialize to empty every time, uh, if you
don't pass it explicitly, okay? So one way is you can pass the container explicitly, okay? So
that's, you know, the safest way I mean, you pass the container explicitly, but then let's say if
someone wants to keep calling this function, uh, with no different item, but does not want to pass
the container itself. So, you know, many of you may, uh, you know, guess that this container will
get initialized to empty because that's how the, you know, that's how, uh, you know, it was working
in the previous class, right? I mean, it was, you know, getting initialized to the default value
and then that value was used, okay? So what we expect is, uh, you know, what, most of you may expect
that this container in each call may get initialized to this empty, uh, placed, okay? But to,
know, our surprise, I mean, this is not the, okay, when you call this function, uh, this container,
this, no, expression is evaluated only once, the expression is this, no, empty list and it is
assigned to container, uh, no, once, uh, and for all because this has to be executed only once
when you compile this, uh, let's say, good block, okay? And after that, whenever you make a call to
this, it will not, you know, get created in each of the calls, if you don't provide this as an
explicit argument, okay? And it will keep adding on the previous list that it has created. So,
what I'm trying to say is, let's compile this, uh, good block. And then, uh, if you want to
use it, let me add a cell and then call this function, now we call this function at item,
okay? And let's say, no, the intended, no way of using it is, no, I just want to add,
let's say one item, let me call this my first item. And I don't pass the second, uh,
no argument, uh, explicitly because I mean, I, I had this flexibility, uh, it is defined as a
default argument. So, I know by default, it should take, uh, empty list and when I execute this statement,
this is what you expect, right? So, what, what do you get as, uh, no, the output?
This container itself, right? I mean, uh, where you have, uh, this, no, fast,
not appearing here because, because we added this to the empty list because it was, you know,
initially created as empty and then, uh, you added this item, which was our, you know,
fast, this is string fast into the list, so it, it gives you. So, now, many of you might,
you know, start believing that if I call the same thing, let's say, uh, maybe again.
So, what shall I expect at this moment? I mean, if I call the same function again,
so, no, if I, and I, if I don't understand the semantics well, then I would assume that the
container, since again, I'm not passing the container, uh, you know, value explicitly,
it might initialize it with, you know, empty value and again, put the, you know,
fast in as the only element in the list and return, right? But what happens when we execute it here?
You see the difference, okay? So, so it's not initializing again this container with the
empty list, okay? And what's the reason for that? Because, you know, when you, uh, define this,
uh, function and you initialize it and run it. So, this evaluation, uh, of expression,
only takes place for that first time and it assigns that value to this container. And since
container is a mutable data types, remember, I mean, list is also mutable data type, which you
can alter later on after defining, okay? So, so that's why I mean, it does not keep creating,
you know, this mutable data type, every time the function is called, it, it creates this
only once when function is defined and, you know, compile, okay? So, that's why I mean,
you see a difference here, right? We made the same function, we made a call to the same function,
again, with the same, you know, argument, we were expecting that we should have only, you know,
fast in the list, but now you see there are two first, first in the list, okay? So, this is very,
you know, important, keep it in your, in mind while using this kind of, you know, operation on
any mutable data type and if you're implementing and if you're using making any parameter, default,
you know, argument or parameter, then you should keep this in mind. Otherwise, this may cause a lot
of no problem. Okay, great. So, now that we have already discussed it, so what can we, I mean,
let's, I mean, if our intention was to, you know, do something like what we said initially that
if someone does not provide, you know, this container, then I would like to always initialize that
container to be an empty, you know, list. So, you can do that, right? I mean, you can,
write that, you know, explain and indicate that explicitly, you know, inside your code.
And a nice way to, you know, do this kind of thing is to avoid this issue and, you know, not
initialize this, you know, container as, you know, empty in the beginning, rather than it, you know,
you can, you know, most of the time in the programmers, you know, commonly use this none,
as a, you know, a sentinel value and create the mutable object inside the function body instead
of, you know, creating just at the time when the, you know, function is being called. Okay,
so what I'm saying is I mean, let me, you know, copy and paste it. So, possible, you know,
good solution to this, maybe, and that, you know, instead of, you know, initializing this container
to this mutable data type here, which is no list, but I can say, I don't want to initialize it
to let's say empty list. And I say, I want it to be none by default. It's still, you know,
default, you know, parameter. So, you may avoid giving any value for this container,
but now it's not a, you know, mutable data type. So, I say, it's none here. And whatever I wanted
to do, you know, or intended to do earlier, I'm to initialize this, you know, container as an empty
thing, if you don't, you know, if it if you don't provide the value explicitly, then you can write
that logic inside the function, you know, definition. So, what I would do here is I can write something
like this that if your no container, you know, is let's say initialize or if your function is called
with a default, by not providing default argument, in that case, no, your container will be
none, right? Because this is the default value, it don't text.
And then in this particular case, when you don't provide some value, I want to each time,
maybe, you know, initialize this container to empty, okay, something like this. And then you do
whatever you were doing, you know, earlier, right? So, this is what we were doing earlier.
So, you got, I hope you get the message that instead of doing here, you know, at the function
call itself for this argument, because, no, this is executed only once. And I intended to execute it
every time when the container is not given to you, I can encode that logic inside the function
definition itself, okay? Instead of here saying that I initialize the empty list, I say that I
initialize empty list here, whenever I see that there is no, let's argument past and at the
second place. Okay, I go inside the function, I execute the function and I see that whenever
container is none, I always, you know, initialize it as a empty list. And this should solve your
problem. If your intention is that, then, you know, you should write your function in this way,
okay? So, let me, you know, so you, I mean, let me, you know, first compile this space of code.
And then, you know, add new block and maybe, you know, just call the same functions, maybe,
the same way, the way we, so you see, we got first, and what if I ask,
or if I, you know, run the same thing again in the new code block?
Now, you see, I mean, you get the behavior that you expected in the, you know, previous scenario,
where I initialize the list as empty list in the very beginning in the function call itself,
okay? A function, okay? So, so this, this is the, you know, distinction that will help you,
avoid many, you know, errors, unintentional error in future. So, keep, keep, keep, keep,
keep this in mind, okay? So, the safe use of default argument is using this kind of, you know,
nothing, okay? So, you can, you know, put this default argument as, you can make these default
arguments completely safe, and you can assume they are safe, when they are some, you know,
immutable types like integer float strings or tuples, but whenever you are dealing with mutable types,
and if you want them to initialize every time, you better encode that logic inside the function
itself, okay? So, this is what I wanted to tell regarding this. So, these are, you know,
the key takeaways from the previous lecture and the, you know, current lecture that we,
we can define function using this, we can call function with positional or keyword argument
that we have, you know, defined in previous classes. Positional arguments must come before keyword
argument is what we discussed already, right? Once you use any keyword argument, you cannot use,
you know, positional argument after that keyword argument. So, keep that in mind, and you should
be very careful when working with immutable, you know, arguments, with mutable arguments,
immutable arguments are, okay? They create, you know, by default, when you pass, there's some immutable
arguments, they create, you know, copies of the original one and the originals one are not
changed. This also we discuss in the previous lecture. So, please, if you don't recall, go back and see
mutable arguments are which, you know, may create no problem. So, if you don't want to change your,
you know, mutable objects that you are passing as argument, so better, no pass, no deep copy of that,
and not the original object, okay? And you always use none for mutable default parameter to
avoid shared state issues like what we discussed just now, okay? So, these are some very important,
you know, notes that we can, you know, derive from our previous lecture and keep that in mind.
So, now, let's continue our discussion on function and talk something, you know, very interesting
regarding the type of value that a function can return. And what are the variations
in the return value that a function can return, okay? So, function can return, I mean,
function of a body can have, you know, one return, no return or multiple returns as well, okay?
And function can also return, you know, one value or multiple values, you know, using something
that takes no sugar, okay? So, both of this is what we are going to discuss today. So,
the return statement, you know, you know, when function, so return statement is how the function
communicates, you know, it's a result to the caller, it immediately exits the function and passes back,
specified value, okay? So, we have seen some return statement, right, where we wanted to,
let's say, return some value from which we might have, you know, calculated inside our function
and we wanted to, you know, communicate to the, you know, caller function. So, you can explicitly
return those values using the return statement. So, the easiest way is this explicit, so return,
I mean, so we'll first talk about, you know, what is, what do we mean, my explicit and implicit
return, okay? So, in explicit return function, specify exactly what to return, okay?
For example, you know, very simple example, let me, you know, we have seen, I mean, this kind of
thing earlier, but let me again, if you want to calculate, let's say, discount on some, you know,
price and if you let's say, no, no, no, no, price of the object and the discount percentage,
you may want to write a function which calculates this discount for you and returns the final price,
let's say, for, you know, that object. So, what is the function that we want to write is,
calculate this count. So, what it takes as input is, you know, price and then maybe
discount percentage, okay? And then the function body starts, now it does something, right?
It calculates the final price after the discount, okay? So, so maybe, you know, it will, first,
calculate the discount amount maybe and then, you know, subtract it from the original price,
what will the discount amount? So, this is price multiplied by your discount percentage that
you know, get from here, right? So, this discount portion.
And then, I don't divide it by, I mean, 100. So, this is what you're going to calculate,
write the discount amount and then, we, our final price,
price is same as the price that you know, gave initially the actual price of the object and then,
you did, you just subtract this discount amount, okay? And this is what we know,
we get at the final price and the function goal was actually to return this final price.
So, so what we can say is return explicitly this value, okay, which is now our final price,
sorry, final price, okay? So, this is now explicitly returning the, you know, calculated value,
okay? So, this is what we call explicit return. So, you can define a function and, you know,
use it in this form also, okay? Where this is explicitly written, okay? So, so this is,
you know, first type or first kind, first one way to use this kind of return statement.
So, another thing is, I mean, we can, you know, we may not, you know, want to, let's say,
return something explicitly using return statement and maybe you just want to maybe print it,
the price, I mean, same, same function we can write where what we are saying is, now we don't
want to return the value, but let's say your only purpose is the print or the recipe, okay,
print the recipe. So, then we don't use this return statement because we don't want a value to
be returned by this function, the only purpose of the function is calculate it and so it, okay?
In that case, you know, we cannot gain, I mean, copy in this whole thing.
And we can say that we, we want to know, you know, don't want to calculate actually, but we
want to just display, you know, display the discount or the final, you know, or receive and you do
all the same, you know, actions and then you may be, you just, you know, print all these things
to the, you know, final user, okay? So, maybe, I don't want to write a return here, but maybe,
I just want to maybe, let's me write it here, we just want to print, you know, these, these are,
what was the final, you know, initial price, what was a discount amount and what was the final price,
if we, our purpose is to just print, we may do this and we may actually completely omit writing
return, okay? So, no return statement, so it will automatically, no return. So, it's not that,
I mean, you will get some, you know, error here, but no, the function will return, okay? So,
let me, you know, run this, this compile, this, no hold, sorry, okay? Now, what if I, let's say,
display, I mean, I call this function, which is my display discount, or I mean, it's a better
call, it's no display receipt, right? Because you're not only showing the discount, but the complete,
no receipt, so let me call it, okay? And when we call this function, let's say,
with some value, let's see, you have to provide these two values, let's say, no, 100 was my original
price and I, you know, give us discount percentage of maybe 20 percent, okay? So, in that case,
if I, you know, want to print, what happens here? You see, I mean, I, you are,
so what you return is your, what, why are we returning? Because this time, I mean, the,
all of the function was not to return, so let's me, you know, just delete this thing, okay?
So, if you don't want to return and just, you know, print these things, right? As output show,
in that case, we can run this and you see, and the action of the function execution is that,
you know, you print all these things on your screen, and this was, you know, purpose of this function,
this display receipt. But one thing to note here is, I mean, although we are not using any
return, you know, this command or keyword while defining this function, function always returns
something, okay? So, whether you do it explicitly, or if you don't, you know, provide this
information, so by default, what function does is that it returns, you the non-value, you know,
automatically, okay? So, if you have no return statement in your function definition,
it does not mean that function does not returns a value. So, function always returns a value,
and in those cases where you have not written, let's say, any return statement, the function will
return a value, which is none, okay? So, I mean, and again, I mean, this may be, you know,
mistaking to, this may mistreat many of you that, if you have not written a return statement,
function is not returning something. No, function is always returning something, which you can,
you know, collect or observe by, you know, storing that in a return value, okay?
So, although we have not written anything here, I mean, this kind of statement that I'm going
to write down right now, so let me, so this is perfectly, you know, a valid display.
In short, it is what we have written right now, right? And if I, let's say, put that value,
when let me know all the same thing, okay? Let me know, comment out this thing,
and what I'm right now doing is, you know, you store whatever the function returns
into result, and you know, many of you might, you know, believe that function is not returning,
and I think this may, you know, preserve some error or something like that, and it may not return,
you know, anything. But I mean, function actually returns always this none value, if you don't
provide this no return statement. So, the result that we get here inside this, you know, result
variable should be, you know, none, and we want to show this side. So, let me, if I want to
see also what the function has returned in this case, in this particular case, I would like to print it,
right? So, let me, you know, print. So, what, what this function return?
function return, and I want to see what it returns in this, you know, variable result, which,
which I'm using to collect the return value, okay? So, now what happens if I, you know,
this piece of code, and I want to see what happened to this result.
So, what's the problem?
Okay, so I did not close this, okay? So, this, I should write it,
go to here, and then,
if I run it, this is what I get, okay? So, function return, none, and this is what I mentioned,
although this function, you know, does not have any return statement, and when I, you know,
call this function and try to store the return value, it returns something very,
and the value return was none. So, keep this in mind, the default return value is always done,
okay? So, none. So, when a function does not have a return statement, or has a return without
any value. So, this is, you know, another condition that, no, may occur, many a time that your
function, you know, may not have return, or it may have return, but it is not, no returning,
anything explicitly, any value, then Python automatically returns, none value. So, we have already
seen, you know, one example where there was no return statement, right? But we can have also,
I mean, some, you know, examples where you are not actually, you are using actually return,
but you may not know return something explicitly, okay? So, both of these are possible.
So, we already saw one example of such thing. So, but the other kind of, you know,
example. So, let me, you know, give you one more example, at least before we go ahead.
So, what if I want to process, let's say, this is very, you know, interesting function.
So, we have already seen one example where, we did not, sorry, return anything. There was no
return statement, but now in this case, let's say, if I define something like this, no process
data, and you pass, you know, this data. So, it's sometimes, you know, return data, right?
But it's sometimes, you know, there's not return anything. So, maybe, so I have not written
this piece of course. So, you know, if it goes to this point, then it will certainly, you know,
give you error. But let's say, you know, for now, I mean, I'm just concerned about this part,
where, you know, if you hit this branch somehow, and when will you hit, if your data has, no,
is let's say, you know, empty, I mean, if you pass empty list kind of thing here,
then you hit this branch and you, you want to return, but you are not returning, you know,
and any value here, right? So, what if I then know stored that value and then try to see what
happened, I mean, in this particular case. So, what I'm trying to say is, let me call this function,
and then, let me call, you know, result one. And in the result one, what I'm saying is,
I call this process, let's say, data function. And when I'm calling it, I want this branch to be,
you know, executed. And for that to happen, what I can do is, I can just keep passing empty list.
So, you know, in that case, it knows that no data is empty. So, not data means, I mean,
no data being true means data is actually, you know, empty, empty list. And this will get executed,
okay? So, it will simply return. And you're not returning any value here, remember, I mean,
although you are returning from the function by saying explicit, not returned statement,
but then no value is being passed. So, if no value is being passed, in this case, you know,
this is executed and the return happens where this root, but no value is passed. So, what can I
expect in this, no result one? Okay? So, I want to, no, no, with that, I mean, this, no result one
is, no, no, not, let's say. So, by default, what I say right now is that it should return and
non-value, okay? So, we can actually print it and just check it. So, if I want to check, let's say,
that my result one is, no, no, not. So, let's select it. I mean, by default, I got none in the
previous case. In this case, also, I want to check. I claimed that it should return none,
but let me check it. I mean, so, if you print this, so, if this is, no, none, then this would,
return us true value. Okay? So, this is what we get. Okay? So, it returns true, no, none value,
and that's how, you know, when you compare this result one with none, you get a true value.
Okay, great. So, now, we have seen that if you default return value is none, whether you,
don't try this return statement or you write return statement without providing any return value
in both the cases you get this none value. So, so, that we have, we have to, you know, keep in mind
where we are writing a function. Now, the next thing that I want to highlight is that function can
have multiple return statement, right? I mean, I mean, in the previous case, also, if you see,
if you observe, I mean, you have multiple return statement, right? We have one return here,
one return here. So, that's perfectly, you know, or valid code structure. So, by syntax,
you know, rule, this is not some, this is not an invalid syntax for Python's program. So,
Python, cavern, multiple return, you know, points, but how, how so, I mean, irrespective of how
many return, you have no return inside your function, only one will execute per function call.
And the first return encounter actually ends the function. And it will depend upon what you are
passing as argument, right? Because the argument will decide the exact control flow of the function,
and it will tell you which of the branches to execute or not to execute. And when you get to your
first return, the function gets, you know, encounters the end of the execution of. So, it is an
indication that now you shouldn't execute. So, this is what is meant by, you know, multiple
return paths. So, for example, a very simple, let me, you know, bring this code to you,
or convenience, or assume that this is the simple function that we, you know, want to write to
check temperature, okay? And then depending upon what is the temperature, you may, you know, want to print
something, and maybe, you know, just return. So, one way can be that you, you know, return that thing
into, you know, return this kind of, you know, strings depending upon this condition, like, if
temperature is greater than 90, I want to just return this string. We said that it's too hot,
indoor, you know, maybe, you know, save this somewhere, web in the color function, call this
check temperature, it also wants this string to maybe, you know, store as a message, let's say,
for later use by some other program, okay? So, this may be a very simple, you know, kind of function,
where we can see there are multiple returns, right? But all of these returns are, you know, inside,
you know, different, if, then else, construct. And you know, when you execute this function,
with some concrete value for temperature, you will eat one of these, you know, branch,
and whichever is the first branch, let's say, you hit, if your temperature is 100, you will hit
this branch, and this return will be, you know, encountered, I mean, and immediately you execute
this return and get out of the function, and all this part of the code will not be executed.
So, this is what, you know, we said that only one, you know, return will be executed,
no power function, call. Okay, although there are so many returns here, right?
So, so we can actually check it, right? So, let me, you know, call this function, and then,
let's say, you know, the very first message that now we want to store is,
corresponding to the argument, let me call it 100, okay? So, check temperature,
temperature, and when we pass 95, okay? So, what do you expect? I mean, in this case, since,
you know, it's 95, it's more than this. So, I expect in my message one, you know, this information,
that, you know, it's too hot to stay indoor, okay? And what if I, you know, pass some other value,
should it let me, you know, pass some other value, and then, we try to see what happens now,
but what can be our message?
It's two. So, when, when I say, let's say, I want to hit some other branch, let's say, in this case,
20. So, if you hit 20, you see, I mean, your temperature, you're saying less than 32. So,
no, most probably, no, this is the branch, this is the first branch that will, that you will hit,
and when you hit this, this message should be written into your message still, right? And what
let's call it one more time to see what happens when I, you know, call this with, so let me call
this message three, and with the temperature, which is 80, let's say, I want to intentionally hit
another branch, 80 will take me, maybe, no, here, it will not take me into this, but you know,
you get into this only when you are greater than 90, you get here only if you are less than 32,
but, you know, with 80, you can hit this branch, right? I'm sorry, you're here.
Okay, and if I, you know, print, let's say, these messages, let's say,
let me make it process two, and then, what if you print message three, we print all these messages,
what, what, what can we, you know, expect here? See, this is exactly what we expected, right,
because we hit, we execute only one of the written statement, okay? Now, some people might want to,
or sub-programming, you know, might want to use these returns as, return statement as a way
to hardly exit in order to validate, let's say, its input. So, if your function is
expecting input to have some, you know, restricted set of value, and let's say, in case you don't
get that set of, you know, value, you may want to, you know, return from the function by maybe
displaying some, you know, interesting message, useful message, okay? So, that's how also many people
pull out programmer, you know, use this kind of, you know, return statements, okay? So, in the
context of, you know, for example, the present problem that we were, you know, discussing this
temperature, I mean, if your temperature value is some arbitrary number, or maybe, you know,
let's say, not temperature is not a good thing to talk in this context, if you are calculating,
let's say, grade, okay? And, for, for a given, let's say, no, no, number. So, if you're, you know,
average, you don't want your average grade to be, you know, less than 0, or, you know, greater than,
no, no, 100, right? Because let's say, if you are grading, you know, you're trying to derive
a little rate for your, you know, exam, and you have been provided the average that a student
get by, you know, we're doing weighted average of all the component. So, in that case, you never
expect your average to be, you know, less than 0, or greater than 100, if there is no negative
marking kind of nothing in your evaluation component. So, if your average score that you get
for against which you want to, you know, calculate the letter rate is outside, let's say, this range,
you know, which not, you know, less than 0, or, no, greater than 100, you use, it's kind of a
hint that something, you know, wrong, and you don't want to execute this whole, you know, function,
which will calculate for you the grade, and maybe you just want to return with the, you know,
invalid average kind of, you know, message to the user. So, in that case, you can actually use
you know, return statement also, by inside some conditional, it just checks whether, you know,
your input is in the range that you expected, okay. Again, I mean, just know for a quick reference,
I will just bring back this function for you, and, so what we are saying that, you know, some
people may want to use early returns for validation also. For example, in this case, you know,
you can use early return for input validation. If your whole goal is to calculate letter rates,
no, for, for given average that a student has now obtained in class, if you know that, this is the
condition, which, which should not be there, you can use this kind of return statement to,
you know, print this kind of message, which can be very helpful, and then return from the
function earlier. If this is not the case, then you go ahead and then calculate this, you know,
return, return, whatever is the grade, okay. So, this is what many of you might find, you know,
useful when you are writing your actual code. So, now, three examples of, you know, this,
let me again, so you hear, I mean, if we try to call this again, same thing. So, you can expect,
I mean, in this case, and in this case, we should get this message right average.
So, invalid average. So, if we run this,
and then if you know, you have to print also like this three value, you need to print it.
So, let me print this three, you know,
this is what, you know, we expected, okay. So, good. So, now, we know that, you know, function,
so this, you know, return statement can be used in multiple ways, that, you know, multiple
position in multiple number of times, but only one of it, you know, gets executed.
The next thing that, that is remaining is to discuss that, your function can return multiple
values also, you know, simultaneously, you know, in all the previous example, we were only,
you know, returning one value, right. But what if you want to, you know, return multiple,
you know, different values, which you might have computed inside your function instead of,
you know, every time, only returning one, you know, value. So, you can use, you know, return
statement to do that also, okay. So, Python allows returning multiple values from a single function.
So, if you don't do anything, so, by, by default, what happens is that these values are automatically
packed into a tuple, and it's, you know, returned as a tuple, okay. So, so, let me know again,
so, you are very concrete example to illustrate this, not automating,
automated, not toppling kind of, sorry, coupling kind. So, automatic, you know, this
tuple making, you know, kind of activity. So,
oh, again, I mean, assume that this is our code. Let me bring a function here,
which is, you know, analyze score. Let's say, again, I mean, we are working with this course,
and it returns multiple statistics about scores. So, the function input is score.
So, if you don't provide score, you can handle it, again, using, you know, the return,
separate type of, you know, return, where it returns, no, 0, 0, 0, 0, if you don't provide
90 score at all, okay. Or, I mean, let's say, you know, you provide an empty, let's list.
But if you provide a non-empty list, then, you know, it will go and calculate the average,
okay, and highest marks, and the lowest marks, let's say, and then it, no, finally, returns this
average, highest and lowest, because we are interested in all these three, let's say,
property, when you are, you know, deciding a letter, you know, even before, let's say,
you decide later, get, you may want to know what is the average, what is the highest,
and what is the lowest, instead of doing, you know, plain calculation, as we did in the previous,
okay. So, we want to return our function, we want our function to return this three values,
average, highest and lowest, and this is the easiest way to say. So, I mean, you just separate
the values that you want to return to these commas, and this will return a tuple.
Of this, so a tuple is actually, you know, in this case, this tuple has no three values, and
this is no one entity itself, okay, and you can actually collect this tuple in multiple ways.
I mean, if you want to collect, no, these values in separate variables, you can actually use
syntactic sugar, and do this unpacking. So, see, by default, it is, you know, packing all
these three values that you are returning into one tuple, okay. So, so what it is written is,
you know, one entity. So, but if you want to, again, you know, observe or, let's say,
collect these values that is being written by function, you know, return statement into different
variable, you can do it immediately, you don't need to, you know, again unpack this manually.
So, Python will, you know, unpack it automatically for you.
So, for example, I mean, if you let's say, let me, you know, make a call to this
function. So, what we can say is, you want to call this function and maybe
store the value that it returns. So, let's say, the value that I want to return, I want to
store in maybe average and the highest and maybe the lowest that I want to return, I keep it
in low. So, so this is what we can, you know, use to collect, okay. So, whenever you call this
function, you know, analyze score function, you have to pass this list of scores. So, what I'm
doing is I'm trying to call this function and then pass some list of numbers, let me pass some list
of number, rectify some numbers. So, okay. So, these are the numbers, let's say,
pass and I, you know, store it into this one and then if I want to print, what are these,
you know, average, you know, high and low values. Now, I can simply print it using a print statement
something like this. So, I print these average high and low values and the actual values,
these average that I collected and this high and low. And I want to see what happens, okay.
So, that does, I know, can Python do it automatically, this kind of unpacking of tuples that
is being written by this function. So, to do that, I mean, we can actually print it and then see
if we run this piece of code. So, this is what you get, right. So, inside average, you get this value.
This is what I'm perfectly and you don't have to do it unpacking. This is a nice syntactic
sugar where you can just write like this, separate it again, this value, you know, this variable
with commerce and it will collect the values written by this. So, so what goes here inside this
average, okay. What goes inside there, here is this average variable is the value written by this
one, okay. Similarly, you know, this collects the value which is more written into this one
and this low collects the value which is written in this lowest one, okay.
So, so instead of that, I mean, you can actually, you may want to return it into a single variable.
So, but then you have to do this unpacking on your own, okay. So, what I'm not trying to say is
that we can maybe, you know, so an alternative way to collect this value maybe, you know,
into a single variable, let's say called rigid, okay. And I again, you know, call the same function,
maybe, you know, analyze score with all the same argument that we passed earlier.
So, in this case, you know, what do you expect? I mean, so since we know that, you know,
these average highest and lowest are always written as a tuple. So, inside the result,
you will see a tuple which has the same value, okay. So, can we run it and see what is the value
inside this result? So, if I want to print a result, so let me print that.
Let me print the values that I want to.
So, I can print the value which I want to know in this result, okay. I know what is the value
that I want to see here? I mean, before I say this, this is it, okay.
Now, if you print again, you see, now, you get a value inside result, which is actually a tuple,
a tuple where all the values are same, but this is no one object, okay. This is one object,
one tuple. But here in this case, we created three variables, no separate variables and all those
variables, you know, these variables, you know, contain the first, second and, you know, third value
inside the tuple, okay. So, depending upon what you want to do with the return value, you can
use any of this, no, for your case, okay. So, good. So, I think I would like to,
so these are the main takeaways. I mean, from today's lecture, that return immediately
exits the function and sends back the value. So, this is how return, now this function will
communicate with the color function. So, if there is no return statement, the function automatically
returns none. If no return statement does not mean that there is no return value. So, return
value is always none. I mean, if there is no return statement, you may have multiple return
statement, which is a perfectly valid thing in Python, but only one of them will, you know,
execute path call, okay. And early details can be used sometimes, no, for input validation and
edge case analysis, okay. So, you can do, no, edge case analysis and input validation using early
return, some programmers actually use this kind of notary. Now, multiple values can be return
and are automatically packaged as tuple. So, this is what we know talk, we just know that, no,
if you want to return multiple value, you can actually mention all those variables with the
return statement separated by comma. And the way the usual way is that they are actually
made into a tuple and then return. So, you can collect, no, those individual value
by doing by, you know, taking help from Python and automatically unpacking that tuple
by writing separate variables or if you want, you can actually collect that as a single,
you know, tuple also inside of one variable, okay. So, all of this is not possible in Python, okay.
So, with this, I would like to conclude today's lecture and we will continue with no function
and discussions around functioning in the next lecture. Till then, good bye, I'll see you in the next video. Bye.
