Hello and welcome back to Python Core and Applied Concept for a Labelled Data Science Work.
In today's video, we will discuss one of the very important concepts of recursion in
the context of function.
We will talk about what is a recursive function and to give you a clear and complete context,
I will use binary search tree as a data structure to show you how recursion actually works.
It's good to learn about recursive programming or recursive functions in the context of binary search tree.
But before we get into binary search tree, we would like to know why we have something like,
you know, binary search tree. So, in computer science, when we try to solve problems,
we normally require a lot of subroutine or solving problems. And one of the subproblems that
occur more frequently in computer science while solving any problem, almost of the problem
is sorting and searching. Because most of the time, we will be working with some data or collection
of data and we would like to update that data or we would like to search in the collection that we
have at hand at no present. So, maintaining a collection of data and then modifying that data
on the way when we are computing something or even proving that data is very common activity
in any programming exercise or problem solving exercise. So, that's why we need data structures,
which are nothing but methods to store retrieve and modify these collections of data effectively.
So, BST is one such data structure, which you will study in later courses also,
when you study data structure algorithm. But for today's context, we will talk very minimally
about BST. So, what is a BST? A BST is a tree like structure, is a tree data structure,
where every node has at most two children. If you remember, I mean, list is also data structure,
which is linear in nature, that for every element in the list, what comes before that element
and what comes after that element. So, these are two important information that you can maybe
write or tell me if I point to any element in the list. So, you have an element coming before
that element in the list or an element coming after that element in the list. Similarly,
tree is another data structure, which is not linear in nature in the sense that there is nothing
called before or after. Instead of that, we say that a tree has collection of nodes,
where each node has some children. And if you want to call your tree a binary search tree,
then the structural requirement is that every node in the tree can have at most two elements.
So, it can have no element. For example, I mean, this is a binary search tree.
And we are talking about the structure right now. Sorry,
let me go back to this one. So, this is a binary search tree, where we can see that these are the
nodes of the tree. And as you can see, this node 8, which has two children. So, this is what we
call left child of 8 and 10 is the right child of 8. So, this is a binary search tree and looking
at the structure, we can easily note that none of the node has more than two children.
So, some node may not have children. For example, this node 1 does not have any children.
On the other hand, if you look at this node 14, it has only one children. But none of the node
has more than two children. And this is the very first structural requirement for a binary
search tree that each node has at most two children. Now, beyond this structural requirement,
we also have this ordering property that must satisfy for a tree to be a binary search tree.
So, what is this ordering requirement? So, the ordering requirement is,
while forming the tree, you maintain these invariants or these constraints. And what is that
a constraint that the left child of any parent should always be less than the parent.
And the right child should be greater than the parent. So, for today's lecture,
we assume for the whole lecture that all the elements are distinctly, let's say,
your collection. So, we don't ask, what happens when nothing's are equal. So,
those things can be handled. But for simplicity, let's assume for today's lecture that everything
that comes to you are distinct in nature. In the sense that you can completely relate them to
each other and say clearly whether one is bigger than other or not. So, either A is less than B
or A is greater than B. So, let's forget about equality today. So, we are talking about
different types of elements where this relation, you know very clearly, you can relate
which one is no less than another one. And for simplicity again, we only consider numbers
in today's lecture. But then this can be easily generalized to any other type,
you know, data type which has this ordering relation. So, you can form a, you know,
VST kind of data structure or any data type that has some ordering relation. And you
should be clear about what is that ordering relation because you need that ordering relation
to check whether, you know, one element is bigger than other or not. So, for the time being,
let's assume that we are only working with less than numbers. Okay. And numbers clearly have
ordering relation which all of us understand. So, now, knowing that ordering relation or number,
I can see, you know, you can see that this is a perfect, you know, binding substrate, right?
Because if you go to any node, you know, the node becomes, you know, parent and then you look at
the child of the parents. And if you are at the right child, then the right child should have value
which is no greater than the parent and the left hand side should have value which is less than the
parent. Okay. And, again, I mean, it's not, it should not be, you know, true for only this,
but any node that you take. Okay. So, for example, if you look at, you know, eight,
okay. So, so you, so everything that comes in the, you know, left hand side. So, so remember,
I mean, when we look at eight and when we look at the left child of eight, we have three here,
right? Now, not only the left child three should be, you know, less than eight, but everything that
comes under this, you know, left subtree of this main tree should also be less than eight.
Okay. That's why you say, you know, both subtree are also BSTM and this property should, you know,
be true. I didn't know that you, you, you're, you take the left subtree of this whole thing,
eight, everything that comes here should be less than eight and everything on the right hand side
of the eight, which, which comes on the right subtree of eight should be greater than equal to,
you know, eight. And this should be true for every, no, place that you go. Okay. Every node that you
visit here. Okay. So, now, you know, we can validate here. I mean, very quickly, right? This is,
this should not be difficult for you to validate that this is a correct, you know, BSTM. All values
in the left subtree are less than equal to eight. Is it true? If you look at the left subtree of
eight, now this whole is a tree, a big tree. But if you look at the root of this, so, so,
eight is a, you know, unique node in this, no, bigger tree. Why? Because, no, eight does not have a
parent, as I said. Okay. So, so we call it the root node, from where every branch, you know,
starts or, you know, the tree starts actually. So, since it does not have any parent, we look at the,
no, left subtree of this, no, bigger tree and the right subtree of this bigger tree, which
appears at this node eight or this root eight. Now, everything here should be less than equal to eight.
And this is what is true, right? Because, no, what are the here? The three, one, six, four, seven,
right? And all of these are not less than eight. So, so, this is okay. All values in the right
subtree are also greater than eight. Is it correct? If you look here again, what are the values in the
right subtree of this tree? 10, 14 and 30. And in this case, also, we see that, no, all of them are
greater than eight. So, this is true, you know, for this eight, but it being only true for eight,
you know, does not guarantee that this is a BST. This has to be true for every node.
Okay. So, now, if you go to some other node, let's say three is the next node that I want to,
you know, see? So, can we do the same check here that everything on the left subtree of three is less
than three? There is only one thing, right? Which is one is certainly less than three. And if you look
at all, all the elements that appear on the right subtree of three, they are six, four, and seven,
and all of them are greater than three. So, right subtree has this where all values are greater than three.
So, for three, for the node three, also, this property holds, right? Same as none for the node eight.
And, and similarly, you can check for six as well, right? For six, if you look at six,
left child is no less than eight, and right child is greater than eight. Okay? And you can,
you know, check that this is true for 10 also, right? Because, you know, at 10, you can see
everything on the right. And so, remember, this 13 is not on the left subtree of 10, right? It is on the
right subtree of 10. And on the right subtree of 10, there are two numbers, 14 and 13, and both of
them are greater than 10. So, that's no perfectly alright. So, 10 qualifies, or I mean, this invariance
holds at this node 10 also. Similarly, you know, you can check for 14 also, there's no hold.
And for the leaf node, it no hold vacuously because there are no child, right? So, so this will
always be true. If there is no child, then how these properties will be violated. Okay? So,
that's why I mean, we call this a binary search tree. So, this is a valid binary search tree,
both structurally and by the property that is invariant at each node, that is true at each of these
nodes. Okay? So, now, I mean, so we don't need to, you know, discuss in detail about the
in order traversal, but you can look about this idea of, out of the class. So, if you do an
in order traversal of this, you know, binary search tree, so you will get a, you know, completely,
you know, sorted elements in the sorted order, okay? So, BST property is recursive. Every
sub tree must also satisfy the ordering constant. And this is what we, you know, discuss.
A different BST can represent the same set of values depending on the insertion order,
but all valid BST will produce same sorted sequence when traversed in this in order traversal.
Okay? So, okay. So, so other things are not important, but the thing that I want to, you know,
mention here is that we, we can generate different, you know, binary search tree with same set of
element, okay? So, there can be multiple BST, which are all valid, you know, BST. And if you
take the collection of elements that this BST have, it may be that they have this exactly same
no collection. So, it's quite possible. It depends upon how you start inserting this element.
And that's what we know we are going to, you know, discuss now, okay? So, but before, you know,
discussing that, you know, this should be clear that we can easily now represent, remember, I mean,
any BST, right? Any BST has this two value, right? Any node in the BST has a value as well as two
things. No, one is the left sub tree and another one is the right sub tree, okay? So, if you are,
you know, making a small, you know, BST by research tree with only one element, let's say 10.
So, what can be a good way to know represent that BST? So, we can represent that node using this kind
of node dictionary, where that node has the value 10. No, the value that we put at any node,
we can represent with this key value pair, which is the very first thing, you know, in the dictionary,
you know, you give the name value as key and then pass the exact value there, okay? And in the left,
you know, sub tree, I mean, this left, I mean, the second key here, which is left,
represents the left, you know, sub tree. Now, the left sub tree itself can be a bigger tree,
right? So, so there, you can actually put a dictionary itself, right? So, like, I mean, nodes are,
can be represented as dictionary, the whole BST can also be represented as dictionary. So,
you can put as the left sub tree, the whole dictionary here and using this right key,
you can represent the right sub tree, okay? So, for at any node, you only have to store this,
you know, three information, right? When you are standing at a node, you must know what is the
values for that node and you should also be able to tell me what is the left sub tree of that node,
what parent node and what is the right sub tree of that parent node, okay? So, BSTs can
naturally be defined as dictionary, right? I mean, dictionary is a very good way. And how are you
maintaining the structural property of BST by, you know, let's say defining node in this way?
Because remember, here we have only, you know, two fields, right? Which represents that's
no children's of the node. No one is the left and one is the right. So, at most, you have
only two children for any given node and there is one value for every node for sure, okay? So,
this structure itself tells us that, you know, this aligns with the structural constraint,
which is required for a binary sub tree. But still, we have not talked about the, you know,
value constraint that we defined earlier, right? That the value should also be, you know,
less than equal to the value of the parent should be no greater than all the values that
is present in the left sub tree and the value of the parent is less than all the values that
is present in the right sub tree, okay? Now, let's do this exercise one by one to see, you know,
how you can maybe, you know, create a binary substrate from scratch. Now, let's say, I mean,
our task is to create a BST, okay? And this is the, you know, order in which elements are coming
to you, okay? So, so you will not have the BST at one go, okay? The whole BST will not be
available to us in a single, you know, go. So, what we want to do is we want to build this
binary substrate one at a time, one element at a time, okay? So, let's say, this is the insertion
order that we want to, you know, follow that first element that I get is 10. So, I have to create
a BST which has only one element which is, you know, 10. So, in the very, and then followed by that,
I mean, I will have next element which I would like to add to my current existing, you know,
BST to enlarge it. And similarly, I will keep, you know, adding one more element every time until I
accommodate all these elements into my binary substrate. So, this is our goal, okay? Now,
if you understand the concept of the BST properly, then you should be able to follow another
following, you know, the upcoming discussion of inserting these elements one by one. So,
okay? So, this is a step by step, you know, process to do that. So, let me increase the font a little bit
here. Okay. Now, in the very first step, when you get 10, what do we do? We create the first node,
and this will be our root node, because the very first node that you insert into your tree is the
root node of your tree, okay? So, when I get 10, at that moment, I know that there is only one
element in my tree, right? Or only one node in my tree, and what is that node? 10.
But I can have, you know, two, you know, trees or sub trees later on, for which I have,
know, kept this placeholder as none for now. So, what I did is I created left as well as right
both and kept there none. So, this, you know, completely it is almost what we have written here,
right? So, a node can be defined in this way, you, where you give the value.
And for the left child, you say that right now, I don't have any left, you know, sub tree.
So, I keep there the value none. So, none, in a sense, you know, indicates that there is nothing
as a left sub tree right now available. So, I just keep there none. Later on, if I get some
values, which are less than 10, I would probably push them towards the left sub tree, okay?
And if I get some values, which are greater than 10, I will push them towards the right sub tree.
So, this is the intention of keeping this none at the moment when you create this first node 10,
okay? And, you know, this is maybe the exact way by which we can actually create this, you know,
node, which we may call no node 10, let's say, okay? So, what if, now, after inserting this
10, so our tree looks something, you know, like this, and then the next number 50 comes.
Okay? So, shall we create a, you know, new child of 10 and put 50 here or that is not allowed
structurally? Right? I mean, that may be a natural suicide that you create a new
children of 10 and then put 50 there, but we know that a binary search tree should not have more
than two child. So, you have to put, you know, 15, one of these two child positions, okay?
And we have already created this two child position and kept none there. So, what we do is, we
try to figure out which of the sub tree I should push 50 towards, okay? So, now, for that, what we
need to do is we have to, you know, use the second property, which is about the values or the
comparison of, or, you know, the relative values of what can happen or what can occur at the root node
and what can occur at light node subtree and left subtree. So, we know that everything on the right
subtree should be greater than or 10 and everything on the left subtree should be
less than 10, less than 10, right? So, can we insert 50 on the left hand side? No. Because as
as soon as you insert 50 on the left hand side and replace this none by, you know, 50,
what will happen? Now, you will valid one of the, you know, invariant that, you know, you will get
immediately a left child, which is, which has value larger than 10, right parent node. So,
that's why we've since, you know, 50 is greater than 10, we go to the right subtree, right? We
go to the right subtree and we find there is nothing none here. So, there is nothing, once you
encounter none, you know, there is nothing, no downside. So, better we put 50 here itself, you know.
So, when you put 50 here on the right hand side, you know, you have maintained, you know,
two thing, you have maintained the structural property of the tree that, you know, you did not
create a new, you know, child. And so, if the tree had initially at most to
child for every node, now also your tree will have, you know, at most to child for every node,
okay? And you have created here this node 50 and maintained this invariant that, you know,
50 is greater than 10, okay? But, you know, since you are getting a new node inside the tree,
what you can do immediately, you can put, you know, their children as not. And this we always want
to do, you know, for, you know, this symmetric region and preserving this structure. So, we don't
know add more than no two things. So, none right now means nothing, right? But, since we have
allocated only two children position for this 50, in future there is no way we can actually,
you know, create the third one, okay? So, we will always go and replace a none with some,
you know, new node. So, this is how we progress, okay? So, in the second step and you see,
I mean, after inserting 50, our tree looks like this. And then what will happen if you get the next
number as, let's say 30. So, when I get the next number as 30, I will compare it first with 10,
okay? And since 30 is greater than 10, we know that we cannot go or not towards the left
subtree and put 30 there, right? Because this will evaluate one of the rules. So, what we do is,
we go towards the right subtree and then compare 30 again with this 50. So, we know for sure that 30
should appear somewhere on this right subtree of 10, right? Why? Because 30 is greater than 10.
No, so, its correct place is somewhere down the line, down the line towards the right subtree.
But, we have not figured out it yet. So, what we go, two is we go and compare this 30 again
with the next, you know, number, which is, you know, the children, immediate children of 10,
this is 50. And we see that now 30 is less than 50, right? So, since 30 is less than 50, so,
shall it go to the left subtree of 50 or to the right subtree of 50? Since 30 is, you know,
less than 50, it should go to the left subtree of 50. So, can we do go, you know, further down here?
That is, we simply put 30 at this place. And the way to know insert 30 is,
we put 30 and then we mark its children to not value.
Okay, so now let's go to the next number that we want to insert in the list. So, right now,
our list looks something like this and we want to insert 70. So, what do you think should be
the correct position for 70? So, in the very first go, I would like to compare this 70 with the
root, which is 10. Since 70 is greater than the root, I should visit the right subtree of, you know,
this, right? And what was the right subtree? This was the right subtree. In the right subtree,
I go and compare again 70 with 50 and I figured out that 70 is greater than 50. So, it's, no,
place should be this position. Okay, so we go here and replace this non-value with 70.
And the updated list should look something like this. Okay, so at this point, now we are done with
our new list and at the end, I mean, when we put insert 20 and 40, our list should look something
like this, right? Because 20 will come to the left of 30.
Okay, so this is how we can actually, so this is the whole process of adding new element to a list.
Oh, sorry, to a binocistry and populating the binocistry one by one. So, we have now
seen the overall, you know, workflow of adding these elements to the list. So, can we now
also get a code corresponding to this workflow or the whatever we discuss the process that we
discuss, can we also convert into code which will actually create no binary surgery and update it
and search this binocistry.
