Good. So, let us see more examples for expectation. So, let us say so a student is writing an
exam with two questions. So, the first question has V1 marks and the
second question has V2 marks. Further, student can only answer the second question only if
they know the first question, only if they answer the first question. Answer the second
question only if they answer the first question correctly, right.
So, the other information is student knows the answer, knows the answers to the questions
with probabilities P1 and P2 respectively, right. So, now, so this is what we have.
A student is writing an exam and the exam has two questions. The first question has
V1 marks and the second question has V2 marks, right. And student can only answer the second
question if they know the answer to the first question, right, rather they answer it correctly.
And let us assume that if the student knows the answer, they write it and it is correct,
right. So, there is an assumption that we are working with. And student knows the answers
to these questions with probabilities P1 and P2 respectively, right.
Now, what we ask is what is the expected number of marks for the student? So, what is the
of marks that the student gets, right. So, this is very standard question. So, the student
is writing an exam with the probability P1 and P2, they know the answer for the question
P1 and P2. Here the caveat is that the student can only answer the second question if they
answer the rather the second question will be graded if and only if the first question
is answered correctly, right. So, let us say to make it more explicit, let us say student
gets his answer or their answer graded if and only if they answer the first question
correctly, right. So, good. So, let us look at this random variable
x that denotes the marks the student could get, right. So, now, x can take values between
it can take 0 where the student does not know answers to either of them and the student
knows the answer of the first one and student knows the answer for both 1 and 2, right.
So, now, we ask what is the probability that x is 0? So, that means, the student does not
know the answer for the first one and does not know the answer for the second one. So,
rather, ok. So, let me just be careful here. So, the student does not know the answer for
the first one. If the student does not know the answer for the first one, they cannot
even answer the second one that the second one will not be graded. So, the entire probability
mass rests on this part, right and then I have probability of x is equal to 1, right.
So, let us go back to x is equal to 0. So, as I was writing, I can write. So, this plus
even if they know the answer to the second question, they cannot answer it. I mean rather
they will not get graded if they do not know the answer for the first one, right. By putting
both of these together, I am going to get 1 minus p1, right. So, just wanted to elaborate
on why you get 1 minus p1. The student either does not know the answers to both the questions
in which case they would get a 0 anyway or the student knows the answer to second one,
but they did not know the answer for the first one, right. So, it is going to be 1 minus
p1 times p2. If you club both of these cases together, what you get is 1 minus p1, right.
And here for this, I am going to write for this, so not V. So, this should be 1 V1, right.
The probability that x takes the value V1 is given by. So, it can only happen if they
can answer the first question, sorry, if they can answer the first question and they cannot
answer the second question, right. And the probability for x is equal to V1 plus V2
is given by, they know the answer for the first one and they know the answer for the
second one, right. So, if you put them together, so let us compute the probability which is
summation of these 3 values. So, let us write it instead of summation, just write it as
probability that x is 0 plus probability that x is V1 plus probability that x is equal to
V1 plus V2. So, this is nothing but 1 minus p1 plus p1 minus p1 p2 plus p1 p2, right.
So, what you get is this and this get cancelled, this and this get cancelled and what you have
at the end is equal to 1, right. This also satisfies that property that we needed for
the probability mass functions, right. So, this is a small example, right, good.
So, now the question I ask is a variant of this where what if this condition was not
there. So, then what would have happened is this could also would have taken the value
V2 in which case the probability that x is equal to 0 is going to be only this and I
am going to add probability of x is equal to V2 in which case I would get. So, what
would I get? I would not know the answer for the first one and then I would know the answer
for the second one, right, which is the same as this, this value is the same as this, right.
So, at the end they also sum up to 1, so all is well, good.
So, then let us take another simple example. So, let us say an experiment succeeds with
probability P, right and this experiment is run independently k times, right. So, what
is the expected number of successes? So, now I can define a random variable x and the range
of x and the range of x is going to be it could be 0 all the way till k, right.
So, now I have this k experiments which run independently and the number of successes
could be anywhere between 0 and k and each experiment runs and succeeds with the probability
and fails with the probability 1 minus P. So, now the first thing is what is the probability
that x is equal to i? So, I have k experiments out of which I want to understand what is
the probability that there are i successes in all of them. That means, there are i successes
and k minus 1 failures, right. So, what would this be? So, this is going to be k choose
i and for those each of those k choose i ones I am going to have. So, P to the i and for
the rest of them I am going to have 1 minus P to the k minus i, right. So, this is what
we have and so, the interesting thing here is if I take summation over probability of
x is equal to i where i goes from 0 to k. So, what do you get? I have summation over
i goes from 0 to k, I have k choose i times P to the i times 1 minus P k minus i. So,
what does this look like? This looks like the binomial expansion of P plus 1 minus P
to the k and this is nothing but 1, right. This satisfies both the principle where the
summation of probabilities for each of these values sums up to 1 and at the same time this
is a binomial expression, right, good. So, now, what is the expected value of this?
So, my expected value is going to be expected value of x is going to be summation i is equal
to 0 till k i times probability of x is equal to i, right. This summation of i is equal
to 0 to k i times k choose i. So, for those who are familiar with binomial series please
try to simplify this. I am going to discuss this in the tutorial at the end of the week,
but try to work it out yourself. So, try to figure out if you can simplify this expression
way, right. So, try to write this as in the k factorial terms. This is going to be k factorial
by k minus i factorial times i minus 1 factorial, right. Possibly you can do some changes here.
So, may be sorry what I was trying to tell you is you write this as k factorial by k
minus i factorial and i factorial and this can be written as i minus 1 factorial times i and this
can be written as k minus 1 factorial times k. Then what you would have here is nothing,
but summation i is equal to 0 till k k times k minus 1 choose i minus 1 times p to the i times
1 minus p to the k minus i. So, you can simplify this further and you can get a very simplified
expression. I will leave it to you to figure this out and we can work it out over the weekend,
good. So, this is the expected number of successes in k experiments.
So, now let us look at another example. So, what is the expected number of trials?
rather trials of coin tosses to see the first hits, right. So, what is the expected number
of trials of coin tosses to see the first hits, right. So, let us say random variable x denotes
the number of coin tosses including itself such that we see heads only in the last sorry. So,
number of coin tosses such that yeah sorry what we wrote is correct only in the last toss, right.
So, this value could be anywhere between 1 and greater. So, this is this I am going to
write as natural numbers the range is natural numbers. So, let us compute what is the probability
that x is equal to 1. So, what is it? So, I have only one coin toss and I want it to
be heads. So, this value is going to be half, right. So, let us say we have a bias coin
to make our life interesting and let us say this coin toss where heads happens with a
probability p with probability p and tails with the probability 1 minus p, right. So,
this will make our life definitely more interesting and I am going to write probability that x
is equal to 1 is p and then I am going to write probability of x is equal to 2 that
means my first trial is tails and then the second trial is heads. So, half 1 minus p
times p, right. Similarly, I can have probability that x is equal to i is nothing but I have
1 minus p to the i minus 1 times p, right. So, this is what we have. So, what is it?
So, what is the expected number of trials needed to see first heads? So, I am going
to write this is nothing but summation i greater than equal to 1, I have i times probability
of x is equal to i, right. So, this is summation i greater than equal to 1, i times 1 minus
i minus 1 times p, right. Again, this can be simplified. I am going to do it again in
the tutorial. So, please think how this can be simplified.
Think about what are you have seen during a high school or like 11 and 12 or your engineering
expressions. So, please work this out, right. So, good. So, the answer that you get here
is going to be roughly 1 by p. So, these are the expectations for the number of trials
needed to see the first heads, right. So, let us see something more interesting here.
So, implicitly what has been going on is something called linearity of expectation, right. Suppose,
I have a random variable X, right, which can be written as sum of random variables
X i's, right. I have X 1 to X n as a random variables and they sum up to give me a new
random variable X. So, now, what is known is that the expectation
of this random variable X can be written as summation of the expectations of random variables
X i. So, it does not care whether these random variables X 1 to X n are independent or dependent.
So, this holds regardless of how the random variables X 1 to X n behave. So, this statement
is universal truth. Expectation of X is nothing but expectation, sum of expectations of X
i, right. So, this is what is called linearity of expectation.
So now, so the other experiment that the, so we had this example of, we had this experiment
that is run independently k times, right and we wanted to understand what is the expected
number of successes. So, that is nothing but, so for each random variable X i, I can have
1 with probability p, 0 otherwise, right and now expectation of X is given by summation
of expectations of X i's, right where i goes from 1 till k, right and what does this
give us? So, what is expectation of each of these? So, let us concentrate on this expectation
of X i's. So, X i takes a value 1 with probability p and value 0 with probability 1 minus p.
So, this expectation is equal to the probability p. So, what I have here is the expectation
is nothing but p times k. So, this is much simpler expression than what we have done
some math over here to get this quantity, right. So, what is so complicated before
can be obtained by this tool what is called linearity of expectation. It is a much simpler
tool, right. So, you get this. So, random variables of this form is take 0 and values
and 1 with probability p and 0 with probability 1 minus p, they are sometimes in literature
called Bernoulli random variables, right. So, X here is sum of some Bernoulli random
variables, right. So, this could also happen. So, let us see if each of these experiments
was succeeding with probability p i and failing with probability 1 minus p i, right. So, X
i is 1 with probability p i and 0 otherwise, right, in which case expectation of X i would
be equal to p i and this implies expectation of X is nothing but summation p i.
So, linearity of expectation is a very powerful tool in probabilistic analysis. So, let us
count the number of triangles in a graph, ok. So, let us consider a probabilistic graph.
So, that is I have vertices v 1 till v n, right and without loss of generality I am
going to call 1 till n instead of v 1 to v n. Between any pair i comma j, the edge could
exist with probability half and it does not have an edge with probability half, right.
So, this is a random graph. So, you have n vertices between any pair of vertices there
is an edge with probability half and there is no edge with probability another half,
right. So, now, what we are interested in is we are interested in what is the expected
number of triangles. So, even before this, a simpler question to ask is what is the expected
number of edges in this graph, right. So, you have n vertices that means, the number
of edges between them could be n choose 2. So, let us write this random variables for
each possible pair. So, for a pair i comma j. So, such that i is less than j. So, I
am going to make it without repetition. So, I am just say going to say i is less than
j to ensure that there is no repetition. So, what are we interested in? We are interested
in this random variable Xij, right and this is equal to 1 with probability half and 0
with probability half, right and what is the expected number of edges? The expected
number of edges. So, expected number of edges is nothing, but summation over all i comma
j such that i is less than j expectation of Xij, right and what is this value? So, how
many ij's are possible? I have n choose too many ij's and what is the value of each of
this expectations? This expectation, this is 0 and random variable. If it is a 0 and random
variable, then what is this? This is nothing, but the probability that Xij is equal to 1,
right. So, I am going to write it that way. So, I am going to write it as summation i
less than j. This is probability that this Xij is equal to 1 and what is this? So, this
is going to be n choose 2 times half. So, these are the expected number of edges
in this random graph. So, let us take this example slightly further to count the number
of triangles, right. So, now, I can like extend this in the following way. So, I can take
triples i, j, k such that i is less than j is less than k and number of such triples
is n choose 3, right. So, now, I can define a random variable Xij k such that 1 if a triangle
between i, j, k exists or 0 otherwise. So, what do you mean by triangle between i, j,
k exists? So, that is there is an edge i comma j and there is a edge j comma k and there
is an edge k comma i or i comma k, right. So, the this series of edges exist, right.
So, now, what is the expected value of this random variable X i comma j comma k? So, this
is nothing, but probability that this random variable X i comma j comma k is equal to 1
and what is this probability? This probability is 1 by 2 into 1 by 2 into 1 by 2 which is
1 by 8. So, why is this the case? So, it is a it is an AND of events where the edge i,
k exists, then the edge j, k exists and the edge i, k exists. Each of them exists with
a probability half. So, together what we get is the expected value of this random variable
is 1 by 8, right. So, now, the expected number of triangles
of triangles is given by all possible choices of i, j, k, we have the expectation of X i
comma j comma k. So, this is nothing, but n choose 3 into 1 by 8. So, this is very good.
Now again you can work out the examples of this by taking instead of half and half you
can take p and 1 minus p, right in which case. So, what is this going to be? This is going
to be n choose 2 times p and here I am what I what I would have is p cube and it is going
to be n choose 3 times p cube. So, this is your expected number of triangles in your
given graph, right. So, you can actually keep practicing more and more with respect to these
examples. So, let us see another example where suppose
we have we have a tray with with chits with names of individuals, right.
So, the chits are upside down. So, the names are not seen from the top. So, each individual
picks a chit at random and uniformly. So, that is every chit has equally possible out
I mean each chit is equally likely, right. So, what is the expected number of
number of individuals who pick their own who pick their own name, right. So, suppose
the number of chits is with m many chits and m many individuals, all right again.
So, we can write our random variable X i to be equal to 1 if 1 with rather it is 1 with
probability 1 by m that is this denotes that the individual the i th individual pick their
name, right and 0 otherwise. So, now, what do we have? We are interested in the expected
number of the guess who pick their own name. So, now, from the above definition X denotes
of individuals picking their own name, right. So, what do you have here? The expectation
of X is nothing but summation over i from 1 to m expectation of X i. So, which is equal
to. So, what I have each of them is equal to 1 by m. So, I have m times 1 by m. So,
one individual will pick their own name, right. So, this is all very good. So, now, let us look
at another non-trivial example. So, let us look at this.
Suppose, we are interested or investing in a particular stock with following characteristics.
So, with probability with probability P, stock grows by a factor of r and with probability
1 minus P, stock falls by a factor of r, right. So, suppose we start with investing in the
stock with 100 rupees. 100 rupees is our initial investment, right. So, we want to see what is the
expected value of our investment on some day t. So, what is the expected value
of our stock on dth day, right. So, this is what we are interested in. So, this is a non-trivial
example of what we have done so far, good. So, now, so let us have random variables which
are time dependent. So, let us say I have my value x 0 is 100. So, on day 0, my value is 100. So,
want to understand what is the value of this from day 2, I have this random variables such
that x i denotes the value of my stock, the value of my stock on day i. So, what is interesting
here is each of these random variables are dependent on each other. So, if I have to write
my x i. So, what is it? So, with a probability p. So, let us look at this. So, x i either it grows
from the previous day. So, let us say I have x i minus 1, it grows with the factor r or it falls
with a factor r. So, this happens with probability p and this happens with probability 1 minus p,
right. So, now, the expected value of my x i is going to be. So, p times expectation of r times
r times x i minus 1 plus 1 minus p times expectation of x i minus 1 by r. So, there is a reason why I
have written it this way. So, suppose x is a random variable, then a times x is also a random
variable for a constant a. So, x by a is also a random variable for a constant a as long as a is
not 0, right. And in which case we also have this characteristic which can also be seen from
linear expectation when r is greater than equal to 1. So, I have p times r times expectation of
x i minus 1 plus 1 minus p by r times expectation of x i minus 1, right. And what is this? So,
this is going to be p r plus 1 minus p by r times expectation of x i minus 1, right.
And you keep doing this. Now, I can open this. This in turn is p r plus 1 minus p by r times
expectation of x i minus 2, in which case I have expectation of x i is p r plus 1 minus p by r
whole square times expectation of x i minus 2. If I keep continuing to do this, what I would
get is p r plus 1 minus p by r to the i times expectation of x 0. On the other hand, x 0 is
a value without any probability. It is not random. In which case I can just substitute this to be
100. So, it is going to be p r plus 1 minus p by r to the i times 100, right. So, this is the expected
value on day i. Then I can substitute i to be i with d, then you get the expected value of my
stock on day d, right. So, this is slightly different from what you have seen. So,
there is some sort of a recursion that is happening, right. Okay, good.
