Welcome back. So, what we have here is the examples of base rule in probability, right.
So, now we will see a few more things that we can do with the base rule. So, recall what
we have done is probability of F condition on E was nothing but probability of E condition
on F divided by probability of E sorry probability of E condition on F times this E condition
on F times probability of F plus probability of E condition on F complement times probability
of F complement, right. So, this is what we saw.
So, in the denominator the way we got the denominator was at probability of E and I
could write it as probability of E condition on F times probability of F plus probability
of E condition on F complement times probability of F complement, right. So, I can actually
write F suppose F is some disjoint union of F 1, F 2 until some F k, I could write P of
E as and the rest of the F complement is nothing but F k plus 1 until some F l. I can
write P of E as summation over i going from 1 to l P of E condition on F i times P of
F i, right. So, you do not just have to look at F and F complement, but you can actually
look at even finer gradations of these events, right. So, this just we will give more examples
in the tutorials for how to do this.
So, let us continue. So, recall that we had P of E intersection F, we can write it as
P of E condition on F times P of F or F condition on E times P of E, right. So, now, what if
I have E intersection F intersection G? So, what can I write it as? I can treat it as
this to be a single event and I can write probability of F intersection G conditioned
on. So, the other way around sorry I can do this. So, I can write probability of E condition
on F intersection G times probability of F intersection G, right. Now, this I can write
as probability of E condition on F intersection G times probability of F condition on G times
probability of G, right. So, what you have here is what we call a chain rule.
So, we have probability of E 1 intersection E 2 intersection until intersection of E n
can be written as probability of E n conditioned on E 1 intersection E 2 until E n minus 1
times. So, for the sake of brevity I can actually write this expression as follows. So, I am
going to just delete this and I am going to write it as intersection of E i where i ranges
from 1 till n minus 1, right. So, this has the same meaning as E 1 intersection E 2 and
so on until intersection of E n minus 1 times I have probability of E n minus 1 conditioned
on intersection of probability intersection of events which are i from 1 till n minus
1 and so on until probability of E 2 conditioned on E 1 times probability of E 1. So, this is what
we will call the multiplication rule or chain rule or chain rule, right. So, hope this makes
sense. So, we will define what is called independent. So, independence of events, right. So, we say
events E and F are independent if probability of E conditioned on F is probability of E
probability of F conditioned on E is probability of F, right. So, the conditional probabilities
are equal to the probabilities of this events themselves. So, given E given E it does not
matter to F. So, probability of F given E is equal to probability of F, right. So, this
is what independence means. So, if you generalize this. So, what we say is probability of E 1
intersection E 2 if E 1 and E 2 are independent is equal to probability of E 1 times probability
of E 2 if E 1 and E 2 are independent E 1 and E 2 are independent, right. I can generalize
this to any number intersection of events i to n E i is nothing but product over P of
E i where i goes from 1 till n if E 1 E n are mutually independent, right. So, this
is a notion of independence of events, ok. So, let us see more examples.
So, we have a question here. Suppose, we have a bag, a bag contains 8 red balls and 4 red
or white balls. So, the probability of rather let me say each ball is equally likely to
be sampled. He is equally likely from the ones from those that are left in the bag.
So, now what is the probability that the first 2 balls picked. So, this is picking
are red. So, now, we ask you have a bag that contains 8 red balls and 14 white balls, right
and each ball is equally likely from those which are left in the bag. Now, we ask what
is the probability that the first 2 balls that are picked without replacement are red,
right. So, now, this is the question that you have done before. We are going to do it
again. So, let us say event E 1 is first ball is red, event E 2 says second ball is red,
right. So, now, we will compute. So, what are we interested in? We are interested in
E 1 intersection E 2. So, we want both of these events to happen, right. So, now, both
the balls in the first 2 picks are red, right. So, this is what you have. So, let us compute
this. So, probability of E 1 intersection E 2. So, from the conditional probability
what we know is probability of I can write this probability of E 2 conditioned on E 1
times probability of E 1. So, now, so, let us work each of them individually.
What is probability of E 1? You have 8 red balls and 4 white balls, right and you want
the ball that is sampled is red. So, what would that be? So, this is going to be I have
8 red balls, I am choosing one of them and I have 12 balls, I am choosing one of them,
right. So, the probability is 8 by 12. Further, probability of E 2 conditioned on E 1 is,
so what is this probability? So, you are given that the first ball that is picked is
red and now you ask what is the probability that the second ball that is picked is also
red. So, how many balls are left? There are 11 balls left and how many red balls are left?
There are 7 red balls left. Now, your probability is going to be 7 choose
1 divided by 11 choose 1 and this is going to be 7 by 11, right and putting both of them
together. So, what I am going to get? I am going to get 7 by 11 into 8 by 12 and what
is this value? This value comes to 14 divided by 33. So, remember we could have also done
this straight away by saying that I have 8 red balls and out of them I am picking 2 and
I am not picking any from the rest of them and then I have 12 balls and I am picking
2 of them, right. So, what is this going to be? This is going to be 8 factorial by 6 factorial
into 2 factorial divided by 12 factorial by 10 factorial times 2 factorial and if you
work this out, what you are going to get here is going to be 8 into 7 divided by 12 into
11 which is the same value as 14 by 33, right. So, we are doing the same thing using conditional
expectation. This is a small example, right. So, now, you can ask. So, what is the probability
that the first 2 balls are red and then I can build on it. What is the probability that
the third ball is white? So, you can ask this question which is what is the probability
that the first 2 balls are red and the third ball is white, right. Here I am going to write
the following. So, now, I will define an event E3 which is the third ball is white,
in which case what I am interested in is probability of E1 intersection E2 intersection E3, right,
which I can write as probability of E3 condition on E1 intersection E2 times probability of
E1 intersection E2. I mean I could have also written it as probability of, so let us expand
this because we have done this right before. So, I have probability of E2 condition on
E1 times probability of E1, right. So, what we have here? So, we just need to
compute this part. So, we are interested in probability of E3 condition on E1 intersection
E2. So, what this says is all the white balls are intact. So, none of the white balls have
been touched and how many balls have been taken out? 2 balls out of the 12 balls. So,
what is the probability of E3? So, I have 4 white balls. So, I have 4 choose 1 divided
by I have 10 balls left, I have 10 choose 1, right into 14 by 33 as we computed above
and this gives us a value which is 28 by, so this is going to be 5 into 33. So, it is
going to be 165, right. So, this is what we have. So, this is essentially this computation
4 into 14 divided by 10 into 33, right. So, what the denominator is 33 into 5, good. So,
this is like the way we have done this is using chain rule. So, here the sequence is
also important, right. So far what we have seen is each outcome is
equally likely. So, let us change the situation to a situation where each outcome is need
not be equally likely. So, let us say, so situation where. So, I have each ball has
a weight, each red ball has weight R and each white ball has weight W, right and each
ball has the probability of picking T equal to its weight divided by total weight in the
bag, right. So, here the situation is very different
from what we have seen so far. So, each ball is not equally likely, right. So, now, so
let us write this events as following. So, let B i be the event. So, let us say B i 1
be the event that the ball rather the i th red ball, the i th red ball is chosen. Here
i ranges between 1 till 8. So, initially I have 8 red balls and B i 1 actually represents
the event that in the first pick I have the i th red ball is as chosen, right.
And now what do we have? So, if you observe carefully E 1 is the union of events which
is B 1 of i, where i goes from 1 till 8, right. B i 1 till B i 8 are this independent events
rather this are disjoint events, right that whose union gives me E 1. So, E 1 says it
is a event where a red ball is picked, but it does not specifically say I want a particular
red ball to be picked. Now, I can distribute this distribute this event into disjoint
events where for each ball I can define an event, right. So, now, these are independent.
Now, what I get is probability of E 1 is nothing but summation of probabilities of these events,
sorry the other way around. There is a notational mistake, but here. So, I have B 1 of i, right,
good. So, now, what is the probability of the i th ball being picked? So, this ball
is being picked with a probability of R by the total weight of the balls in the bag.
So, what is the total weight? I have 8 red balls plus I have 4 white balls, right. The
probability of the i th ball being picked is R by 8 R plus 4 W, right. So, which tells
me that the probability of event E 1 is 8 R by 8 R plus 4 W. So, this probability of
E 1. So, now, I will define probability of E 2 given E 1, right.
So, now, initially my weight of the bag was 8 R plus 4 W. Now, I have taken one red ball
away, then I have only 7 red balls. Now, the total weight of the bag is 7 R plus 4 W, right.
Similarly, for B 2 for the round 2, I can define B 2 of i. I can define it for all i
except for the ball that has been picked in the first round. Event that i th ball is
chosen in round 2, i th red ball is chosen in round 2 or the second sampling, right where
i. So, let us say in the first round, I have some ball which is called i star which is
picked for all i not equal to i star in 1 to 8, right.
So, now, I can write my probability of E 2 given E 1 as summation over all i not equal
to i star, then i going from 1 till 8 probability of B of i of the second round, right. Now,
again I have 7 red balls left and each red ball is sampled with the probability of R
divided by 7 R plus 4 W. As we said, each ball is sampled in the with the probability
that is given by the ratio of its weight divided by the total weight of contents of the bag.
So, now, this happens to be 7 R by 7 R plus 4 W. Putting both of these together, what
probability of E 1 intersection E 2 is going to be 8 R by 8 R plus 4 W times 7 R by 7 R
plus 4 W. So, this gives you the probability. So, this is setting where you have probabilities
of sampling different for each round and each outcome is not equally likely.
So, if I actually pick in this round 2, if I pick a red ball the probability of picking
it is R by 7 R plus 4 W, but if I were to pick white ball its probability is going to
be W by 7 R plus 4 W, right. So, for a white ball, so, this probability would have been
W by 7 R plus 4 W, right. So, this is a non-trivial example which uses both conditional probabilities
and the probabilities of the outcomes not being equal, right.
