So, we will come back. So, today what we are going to see is the notion of random variables
right. So, first we will define what is a random variable
and then see what use this has right. A random variable, so let us say let us call it x,
is a function or a map from sample space to real numbers right. A random variable is nothing
but a function from the sample space to real numbers right. So, the examples that we can
see are the following. So, number of heads in k many coin tosses right. So, see let us
take an example. Suppose I have k coin tosses. So, my sample space is going to be a vector
E in H comma t whole to the k. I have k many tosses and I have a vector E, so which is
over H t to the k right. So, now what are we interested in? We are interested in the
number of heads in the coin tosses. So, how many heads can we have? I can have 0 heads,
I can have 1 heads, I can have 2 heads and so on until k many heads right. So, I have
all these possibilities that I can have. So, I have the sample space and over the sample
for every choice of k many coin tosses, I have a corresponding value of how many heads
do I have in that right. Suppose I have heads, tails and so on until H. So, for this the
corresponding random variable that I can define is going to take this as input and output
of heads in this given sequence right. So, I have all possible coin tosses k many coin
tosses and I have a corresponding number. So, my random variable here happens to be
the number of heads in each of the sequences of coin tosses right. So, the way I can define
here is x can take values between 0, 1, 2 and k and there is a corresponding value probabilistic
value for each x. So, we will elaborate on that in a bit, but a random variable is nothing
but a random function sorry a random variable is nothing but a function from the sample
space to the real numbers. So, as it happens here the range of this random variable instead
of being real numbers, we have natural numbers between 1 to k right. So, this is one example.
So now, the other thing could be the other example of a random variable could be the
outcome of a die roll right. So, what are the options for this random variable? So,
the corresponding options are going to be it is going to be 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 ok.
Then we can go on defining random variables as follows. So, let us first see a non-trivial
example of a random variable which is the number of coin tosses until we see we see
a heads for the first time right. So, suppose I have a sequence of coin tosses right I can
get either a heads or a tails in the first call. So, suppose I do not get a heads in the first
call then I have tails there. So, now, I toss a coin again I could either get a heads or a tails
right. So, I wanted to see the number of coin tosses until I see the heads for the first time
right. In this number I am going to include the coin toss where I see the heads as well right.
So, now, like you know this could be either this corresponding random variable could be 1,
2, 3 and so on right. So, the range of x in this particular situation is going to be the
natural numbers itself right. So, here again I am going to say the range of x is this. So,
instead of saying belongs to I am going to say range of x and again here instead of belongs
to the right notion to say is the range of x because you are talking about functions
right. So, it would be stupid to say belongs to because x is a function that takes element
from the sample space rather it takes an outcome from the sample space and gives a corresponding
value right. So, these are what are called random variables and I could also have random
variables which are. So, I could say. So, indicator random variables right. So, I have
x which takes a value 1 if experiment succeeds 0 otherwise right. So, this is this is a indicator
random variable. Here the experiment is a random experiment. So, for the when we say
variable it is associated with some random experiment or a random trial right. So, this
is how we define random variables. So, what are we seen so far? So, the synopsis is random
variables of functions, random variables of functions and the range of random variables
it takes. So, when we say functions I can actually say sample space to real numbers
range of the random variables specifies the values it takes right. So, this is the synopsis
of what we have seen so far. So, now, for a random variable x we can talk about what
is the probability it takes a particular value. So, in case of a dice it took values
between 1 to 6 right. So, now, I ask what is the probability that the outcome is actually
equal to 1 the random variable takes this value 1. So, in which case if it is a if the
dice is such that all the sites are equally likely I have this value to be 1 by 6. Similarly,
probability that x is equal to 1 is the same as probability for x is equal to 6 all equal
to 1 by 6. So, now, let us look at the coin tosses again.
So, when we have this coin tosses suppose we have suppose we toss 2 coins right. So,
2 distinguishable coins then let x be the random variable
that counts the number of heads right. So, now, what do we want? We want to see what
is the probability that x takes a particular value right. So, if I look at my sample space
for this my sample space is going to be H comma H, H comma T, T comma H and T comma
T. So, these are these 4 events and let us assume that all these 4 are equally likely.
So, this is the assumption that we want to work with right and what is the possible values
So, let me say range of x. So, range of x is actually 0, 1 and 2 right. So, I have number
of heads is 0, I have number of heads is equal to 1 and I have number of heads is 2 right.
If I investigate this outcome the number of heads is 2, if I investigate either of these
individually the number of heads is 1 here, the number of heads is 1 here and here the
number of heads is 0 right. So, now, we ask what is the probability that my random variable
takes a value 0 right. So, it only happens in this particular situation. So, this outcome
1 by 4. So, now, I ask what is the probability that x is equal to 1 right. So, now, this
probability is nothing but 2 by 4. So, how do we analyze this? We can also analyze it
with our events notions right. So, x is equal to 1 is equivalent to saying the event where
we have exactly 1 heads right. So, this is an equivalent way of looking at events right
some of the events not every event can be written this way, but some of the events can
be written in terms of random variables. So, in this particular case we are lucky.
So, I have probability of x is equal to is 1 by 4. So, now, so, if you stare at both
of these examples that we have here. So, if you look at this and if you look at this. So,
we have the cases in the range I have 0 1 2 and if I sum up the probabilities for each of the
values that appear in the range this probability sums up to 1 and similarly for each of these
values in my range if I sum up their probability I get 1 right. So, now, let us make this explicit.
For each value v in the range of x let p v be the probability that x equals v.
Then summation over all v belong to the range p v is equal to 1. So, take few more examples
and this will be very clear. So, let us work with another example. So, we have a bag
with 20 balls with numbers of them. So, I have ball 1, I have ball 2 and so on until I have ball 20.
Suppose, we pick 3 balls from the bag we want to analyze the probability that the
ball is at least 17. The probability that the highest numbered ball is 17 right. So,
this is what we have. So, we have a bag with 20 balls in it each ball has a number on it right
and we are picking 3 balls out of the 20. We want to analyze what is the probability
the highest numbered ball is 17 right. So, this is what we want to do right. So,
let us do this using random variables right. So, let x be the random variable denoting
the value of the ball. So, rather the highest the value of the highest valued ball or let
me just say denoting the number of the ball of the highest valued ball amongst the 3 balls
that we pick right. So, x can take values between. So, the minimum possible value x
can take is 3 right. So, if I have to define range of x, range of x is from 3 until 20.
So, x is a random variable that denotes the value of the highest valued ball in the 3
balls that are picked right and the range is between 3 to 20. So, when you are picking
3 balls. So, it must be the it must be the case that the highest valued ball the value
should at least be 3 right. If you are picking 1 2 3 the highest value is 3 right good. So,
now what are we interested in? We are interested in the probability that x is at least 17 right
and then I am going to write this as probability O of x is equal to 17 plus probability that
x is equal to 18 plus probability that x is 19 plus probability that x is 20 right.
Now, let us compute probability that x is equal to k for some value k between 0 and between 3 and
20 right. So, now what does it mean? So, I have 20 balls out of which I am picking picking 3 balls
and I want the highest value to be k. That means, I have one ball whose value is k and the other
2 balls and their value could lie between 1 and k minus 1 correct. So, my probability that x is
equal to k will be equal to k minus 1 choose 2 divided by 20 choose 3 right and now this will
tell us that the value that we are interested in is given by 16 choose 2 plus 17 choose 2 plus
18 choose 2 plus 19 choose 2 all divided by 20 choose 3 right. So, there is another thing
that we have learnt using this example that we can actually look at probability of x greater than
equal to some value using these right. So, now what do we have? So, we learnt what is a random
variable and we have learnt what are associated probabilities. So, we have probability mass
functions right associated with every value we have a probability estimate. For every value v
belong to the range of the random variable we have an associated mass or weight right and as
we have seen above we have the summation p v is equal to 1 and what is this p v? p v is nothing
but probability that x takes the value v right good. Now, let us see what is called an expectation.
So, an expectation is nothing but a weighted average of your random variable right. So,
suppose I have a random variable x and x takes the values. So, the range of x is such that I have
0, 1, 2 right in the example of two coin tosses and my random variable x denotes the number of
heads right. So, now, my expectation of a random variable is defined to be summation over all values
in the range of x. So, I have v times probability of x equal to v right. So, I have 0, 1, 2
in the example that you have chosen. So, it is a example of two coin tosses and x denoting
the number of heads right. So, what did you say? The probability that x takes the value
0 is 1 by 4, the probability that x takes the value 2 is again 1 by 4 and probability
that x takes the value 1 is half right. So, now, I can say the expected number of
heads is given by 0 into 1 by 4 plus 1 into 1 by 2 plus 2 into 1 by 4. So, what is the
value here? So, I have. So, this gives me 0 plus half plus half right. So, what this
says is on an average when each event is equally likely, I will see at least one heads right.
So, this is what the average tells us. So, this is what you call expectation. You can
think of your expectation to be a weighted average where the weights are given by the
probability mass function right. So, we can see more examples of this form.
So, what is an expected outcome rather what is the expected value of random variable
x which denotes the outcome of it Faraday's right. So, here I have expectation of x is
nothing but 1 times 1 by 6 plus 2 times 1 by 6 plus 3 times 1 by 6 plus 4 times 1 by
6 plus 5 times 1 by 6 plus 6 times 1 by 6 right. So, what is this value? So, this is
nothing but summation i from i is equal to i is equal to 1 till 6 divided by 6. So, if
you apply this summation i from i is equal to 1 till n, you get n times n plus 1 divided
by 2. So, here it is going to be 6 times 7 divided
by 2 by 6. So, there is nothing but 3.5 right. So, this is an example to illustrate that
the expected value has nothing to do with what are the outcomes. So, 3.5 is not an outcome
of the dice, but still the expected value is this right. So, this is not a problem at
all. So, you do not have you do not need to have the expected value to be the same as
your range of your outcomes I mean to be in the range of your outcomes.
