So, here is another example, so a company sells screws
in packs of 10. So, each screw is faulty with probability 0.01, independently of other
screws right. So, if the company sells
with a guarantee that at most one screw is faulty and it can
buy back or it can ask the customers to return the pack if more than one screw is faulty
what are the number of returns, what are the estimated number of returns
for the company if a million packs are sold. So, this is a question where a company selling
packs of screws where each pack contains 10 screws right and each screw is faulty with
probability 0.01 and this is faulty with respect with independently of every other screw in
the pack or screw in the entire company right and the company is also offering a guarantee
that at most one screw is faulty out of the 10. So, now, the company said if you found
more screws that are faulty in a single pack please return the pack we will take it back
no cost right and we will return the money. So, now, we want to estimate the number of
returns for the company if a million packs are sold right. So, this is a problem with
statistics involved right. So, now, let us concentrate on a single pack right.
So, let X be a random variable that denotes the number of faulty number of faulty screws
in a pack right and what could this be the value could be anywhere between 0 and 10,
so this is my range right. So, now, I want to understand what is the probability that
the pack gets returned. So, what is this? So, that means, I want to understand that
the pack is returned if and only if there are at least two or more screws that are faulty.
So that is we are interested in the values of X rather the probability that X takes values
greater than equal to 2 right. This is nothing, but 1 minus probability that X is strictly
less than 2. So, which is nothing, but 1 minus probability that X is 0 minus probability
that X is equal to 1 right. So, what are the each of these probabilities? So, let us concentrate
on this part. So, I am going to write probability that X is 0 is nothing, but I have 10 screws
right I am picking 0 of them and then the faulty with the probability 0.01 right. So,
with probability 1 minus 0.01 I have no faults right and similarly I have. So, I have 10 choose
1 times 1 minus 0.01 for 9 of them and 0.01 for the rest of them right. So, now, I put this value
here it is going to be 1. So, 1 minus 1 minus 0.0. So, let me write this is 0.99 to the 10
minus 0.1 into 0.99 to the 9. So, now, what I have done here is I have combined this 0.01
into 10 over here. So, I get 0.1 here right. So, you get this some value over here. So, now,
this is a probability. So, let us call this value some epsilon if you compute it. So,
what you get this value is roughly about 0.004 right. So, this is the probability with which
the pack has to be returned right. Now, the expected number of packs expected number of
packs that are need to be returned. So, this is nothing but this roughly rather
0.004 into 1 million right. So, what is this? This is roughly 4000 packs. So, correct me if I am wrong,
but yeah. So, I am going to move yeah. So, it is going to be roughly 4000. So, 4000 order the million
packs need to be returned right. So, this is an estimation statistical estimation that can work
in the industry. So, now, so far what we have seen is we have seen expectation right. There is a
random variable and there is an there is an expectation. So, that means, you have some
behavior and an average of that behavior. It is not necessary that the random variable will take
this expectation right. So, I have a random variable and I have an expectation right. So,
now, it is not necessary that this value will be equal to expectation all the time. So, we are
interested in finding out how this random variable behaves with respect to this expectation. So,
for example, what I am interested in is I want probability that X is at least 2 times expectation
right. So, this is this is the behavior of this random variable as it deviates away from its
expectation. Suppose, I have a random variable X that takes some values. So, let us say this
horizontal line represents the range of X right, range of X placed on a real value real line.
Let us say I have my expectation somewhere over here. So, now, the question here what we are
asking is what is the probability that this random variable X deviates from my expectation right. So,
I have this expectation and what is the probability that it deviates from. So, what is the probability
that my random variable takes this value I mean that is this value. So, what is the random like.
So, I can ask this instead of 2 I can put some constant C rather I can phrase it as
probability that X takes a value greater than 1 plus epsilon times expectation of X right.
What I claim here is that my claim is that probability of X greater than 1 plus epsilon
of expectation of X is at most 1 by 1 plus epsilon right rather probability that X is
greater than 2 expectation. So, it is at most half. So, here. So, if I have a strict inequality
inside then I have a strict inequality outside as well right. So, now, in general what I can write
this as I can write as probability that X is greater than a its at most expectation of X divided
by a right. So, let us apply to the one of the things that we have done. So, let us say X denotes
the number of successes in k trials in k independent trials of an experiment right.
So, now, we ask what is the probability that X is greater than 3 by 4th k right and this is at
most what is the expectation of this. So, probability times k divided by 3 by 4 into k and this value is
nothing but 4 p by 3 right. This only makes sense when p is smaller than 4 3 by 4 right. So,
this is an example and what we see here is what is called Markov inequality right. So,
for example, if the each of the independent trials was about the number of heads seen in
k coin tosses. So, in which case the expected number of heads. So, would have been k by 2
and probability that the number of heads is greater than 3 by 4 k is at most half times 4
by 3 which is nothing but 2 by 3 right. So, with the probability of at most 2 by 3 the number of
the random variable X is at least 3 by 4 k right. So, this also explains you the behavior of your
binomial random variable right. So, as you have seen before the number of heads or the number of
successes in the previous session behaves like a binomial distribution right. So, half k trials
and I want i of them to be heads right. So, now what was it? It was k choose i it was k choose
i times half to the heads times 1 by 2 to the k minus i. So, this behaves like a binomial variable
right. So, now if you stare at a binomial it peaks somewhere in the half right. So,
your expected behavior of your random variable. So, the way it is like its mass is somewhere
around the half. So, the other way to think about these kind of inequalities is what is the
probability that a random variable takes a value while it deviates away from its expected value.
So, these are what are called tail inequalities right good. So, we will see more of these
examples in the sessions to come and in your problem set.
