Welcome back. So, what were we doing? So, we are defining what is called conditional probability.
So, what did we have before? So, we said for events E and F, probability of E condition on F.
The other way to read this is probability of E given F.
F is nothing but probability of
E intersection F divided by probability of. So, this is what we have.
Good. So, now, what can we do? So, let us take some examples.
So, suppose you have two coins.
What is the probability that
the two coin outcomes
are distinct? So, this is a basic problem that we have. So, what is the sample space for this?
The sample space for this is H, H, T, T, H and T, T. So, what is the event here?
The event here is that I have H, T and T, H. And what is the probability of this event?
Probability of this event is. So, we are again, we are assuming that each of these
outcomes is equally likely. So, these are our possible outcomes.
And we are assuming that each of these outcomes is equally likely. So, in which case I have
probability of P of E is number of elements in E which is 2 divided by the total number of elements
4. So, I have 1 by 2. So, now, I ask the second question, which is, what is the probability
that the first coin TOS has an outcome as hits?
So, this is a valid question. So, let us call this event F.
And this is going to be H of T, H, T and then I am going to have H, H.
So, what do I have here? Probability of F is nothing but again 2 by 4, which is half.
So, now, I ask the further question, which is,
what is the probability of the outcome, probability of the event
where the first coin toss is
hits given the coin tosses are distinct?
So, that means the first coin toss is not equal to the second coin toss.
So, now, this is nothing but we are looking at probability of,
so, we are looking at an event where the first outcome is hits. So, I have F given the coin
tosses are distinct. So, what is that? It is probability of F given E. So, what is this?
From our formula above, it is probability of F intersection E divided by probability of E.
So, what is the probability of F intersection E? So, F intersection E is the set which is H, T.
And probability of this is going to be, I have only one element here. So, I have 1 by 4.
So, this is the probability there. So, probability of F given E is equal to
1 by 4 divided by 1 by 2, which is nothing but half.
So, this gives you the probability of F given E. The other way to look at this is the formula.
So, given that event E occurs, we are interested in the event F.
So, now, what is F given E? It is nothing but the set H, T.
So, what is the probability of, so, what is this event E?
So, event E is nothing but H, T and T, H. So, now, what we are looking at is,
we are interested in the probability of the event F given E given this as the universe.
So, if I work out my example, so, probability of F given E is actually equal to half.
So, I have one out term or two possible outcomes. So, this event E
has two possible outcomes and F given E is one possible outcome.
That is, we have one possible outcome out of these two possible outcomes.
So, here this is a situation where all the events are equally likely.
Now, as an afterthought of this explanation, I would like you to think about the cases where
the events are not equally likely, the outcomes are not equally likely.
So, the other way to think about this conditioning is defining new probabilities
based on this conditioned event as a new sample space or the new universe.
So, something more philosophically that is going on. So, F given E and E, so, here E becomes a new
universe or new sample space and the event you are at the subset that you are interested in is F
given E. So, this is like some sort of, this is a smaller universe and the smaller subsets of that
universe. So, this is a philosophical way of looking at conditioning, but for the sake of
this course, we can assume this formula to be correct and work on. So, we will see more examples.
So, the next example that will work is the following. So, given two dice,
we are interested in. So, what are we interested in? We are interested in
the event where the outcome of one of the two dice
is odd given the sum is even. So, we have two dice. So, I have dice 1 and I have dice 2.
So, let us let them output the values x and y. So, now,
we are interested in the case where either x is odd or y is odd
subject to the condition that their sum is even. So, this is a stupid case where
if one of them is odd, the other one has to be odd for the sum to be even.
So, now, what is our universe here? S is nothing but I have 1, 6. So, how many choices do I have?
I have all 6 choose 2 into 2 options.
So, we are interested in the possible sums. So, what is the range of the sums? So, initially,
I have 2. The minimum possible value for x plus y is 2 and the maximum possible value for x plus
y is 12. So, now, what are the values that are available? 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12.
So, these are the possible sums that are for x plus y. For 2, what are the possible choices
of the outcomes? 1, 1. For 3, I have 1, 2 and 2, 1. For 4, I have 2, 2, then 1, 3 and then 3, 1.
And for 5, similarly, I can keep writing this. So, for 5, I have 1, 4, then I have
2, 3, 3, 2 and then I have 4, 1. And then for 6, I have 1, 5, then I have 2, 4, 3, 3, then I have
4, 2, then I have 5, 1. Then for 7, I have 2, 5, 3, 4, 4, 3 and then 5, 2. And for 8, I have 2, 6,
3, 3, 3, 5, then 4, 4. Then, so, I am missing for 6. For 7, so, I miss 1, 6 and 6, 1 here.
So, now, similarly, yeah, so, there is going to be 5, 3, then 6, 2 and that is it. For 9,
I have, so, the minimum that I can do is 3, 6, then 4, 5, then 5, 4 and then 6, 3.
And then similarly, for 10, I have 5, 5, 4, 6 and 6, 4. And for 11, I have 5, 6 and 6, 5.
And that is it. And for 12, I have only one option, which is 6.
So, now, this actually is my, so, if I put all of them together, that is my sample space for 2 days.
So, now, please mention in the description if I am missing any of these elements. However,
so, let us see. So, what is the event E? So, let us say event E is the outcome of one of
the 2 days is even. So, either x is odd, sorry, x is odd or y is odd, rather both of them are odd.
So, event E is x is odd or y is odd. F is the event where the sum of x and y is even.
So, now, what we are interested in is probability of E conditioned on F.
So, what is this situation here? So, we want to find out what is probability of E intersection F
divided by probability of F. So, I would leave this example to you to work things out
given the sample space. Again, you would see the same. So, you can list out what is probability of
E conditioned on F given probability of F. Rather, so, you look at all possible outcomes E
conditioned on F and F and again, you will observe that you have a new sample space F
and you are looking at E conditioned on F, which is a subset of F.
So, please continue working this example by yourself. It is not very difficult.
Right. So,
so, these examples can be continued in like multiple ways. Suppose, question, the other
question is, suppose we have a bag with R red balls and B blue balls.
Right. And we are interested in, we are picking
N balls without replacement, N balls at random without replacement.
Right. So, what is the probability
of E that the first ball is blue given k of those balls are blue.
Right. So, this is the event we are interested in.
Good. So, just stay with this question for a bit. So, you have enough balls. So, we assume that
N is smaller than R plus B. Right. And we will also make an assumption that each ball is equally
likely. So, these are assumptions that we are making. So, now we are interested in picking
N balls and we are interested in the event E where the first ball is blue.
So, let us say event E is first ball is blue. Event F is k out of N balls
are blue. So, you have R plus B balls in your bag. What are them? R of them are red and B of them
are blue. So, what are you interested? You are interested in picking N balls without replacement
from this bag. So, we are interested in a case where the first ball is blue conditioned on the
fact that the k out of N balls are blue. Right. So, now let us write this probability P. P of E
conditioned on F. What is this? There is nothing but probability of E intersection F
divided by probability of F. Right. So, what is this event probability of E intersection F?
So, you have, so again, so let us write it in English, probability of E intersection F.
So, out of the N balls that are picked,
the first ball is blue and the rest
of them are k minus 1 blue and N minus k minus 1 minus 1 red balls.
Right. So, this is the distribution of your balls in the N balls that you have chosen.
So, what is the sample space here in this experiment? Again, I can define my sample
space to be, so again, I am going to choose as a vector R comma, a vector E
belongs to R comma B to the N. So, that is I am choosing a vector of length N
where each individual location can either take R or B, corresponding to whether it is a red ball
or a blue ball. So, for the sake of simplicity, last time we said if it is red, 0, if it is blue,
like put 1, but let us use the letters R and B and we are looking at vectors
where individual coordinates can be either R or B and we are looking at N length vectors.
So, this was your sample space. And the event F was nothing but you are looking at all those
vectors E, E prime such that E prime belongs to S and the number of Bs, the number of B in this
in this outcome, in this rather let us say the number of Bs in E prime is exactly k.
So, now, so this is like, so here exactly, so let me also quantify this as exactly.
So,
so this is your, so that is what we have. And what will E be? So, just I will give you a moment to
think what E is. So, E is, so it is going to be E double prime such that
the first coordinate, the first coordinate of this is going to be equal to B,
event E was nothing but the first ball is blue. So, this is sufficient.
So, what we have here is probability of E condition on F is given by
probability of E intersection F divided by probability of F.
So, what is probability of E intersection F? So, let us compute that independently.
So, we want the first ball to be blue. So, I have B by R plus B. So, why do I get this? So,
this is given by, so this is given by B choose one, I have B many black balls or blue balls
and the total number of balls is R plus B. So, this is nothing but B
choose R plus B and then into, so out of the rest of the balls, I am choosing B minus 1 choose K
minus 1 times I have R choose N minus K divided by R plus B minus 1 choose, so what is this quantity
going to be have N minus 1 because I have picked one ball here, I am choosing N minus 1 balls here.
Out of those N minus 1 balls K minus 1 of them are blue and N minus K of them are red. So,
this is the direct application of the formula that we have seen in the probability basics.
So, what is this evaluate to? So, we will use a lazy evaluation for this.
So, let us ignore that one. Let us compute what is probability of F.
The probability of F is, so the number of blue balls is exactly equal to K. So, I have B many
blue balls and I am choosing K of them blue and then I have R many red balls and I am choosing
N minus K of them and the total number of balls that I have is R plus B and I am actually looking
at what do I have here. So, I am looking I am picking N balls. So, putting both of them together
what do I get? I have B divided by R plus B. So, this is the computation that I am doing
times B minus 1 by K minus 1 sorry. So, I should have B minus 1 choose K minus 1
times R choose N minus K divided by R plus B minus 1 choose N minus 1 divided by what do I have
here? B choose K times R choose N minus K divided by R plus B choose N. So, this is going to give
me. So, let us examine. So, continue it over here. So, I have B divided by R plus B into
B minus 1 factorial by K minus 1 factorial times B minus K factorial.
So, I am going to just cancel these two terms right away. So, into. So, for this part I am
going to write it here. So, I have K factorial times B minus K factorial by B factorial into.
So, for this term I am going to write it as
N minus 1 factorial divided by R plus B minus 1 factorial into
R plus B minus N factorial. And for this part I am going to write
R plus B factorial divided by. So, what do I get? So, sorry this goes into the exponent here.
This moves here. So, this is going to be N factorial into R plus B minus N factorial.
So, what I get here is this cancels with this, then this cancels with this and then these two
together cancel this. And what I have here is this combined with this cancel this.
So, essentially what I get here is K factorial by K minus 1 factorial which is actually equal to K
times N minus 1 factorial divided by N factorial which is nothing but K by N.
So, what we get here is probability that the first ball is blue conditioned on the fact
that what are the N balls that are picked? K of them are blue. So, E is the event where the
first ball is blue. F is the event where out of the N balls that are picked, K of them are blue.
So, E conditioned on F you get K by N. So, there is another example of looking at conditional
probabilities. So, implicitly we could have also done the following. So, we could have actually
looked at P of E intersection F which is nothing but P of F conditioned on E times probability of E.
So, this is what we have. So, what is probability of E? So, it says the first ball is blue.
So, that is going to be B by R plus B. What is F conditioned on E? The first ball is blue,
the rest of them, out of the rest of them K minus 1 of them are blue, the N minus K of them are red.
So, there are N minus 1 balls that are being picked. Out of these N minus 1 balls, K minus
1 of them are blue and N minus K of them are red. So, what is this? This is nothing but,
so it is going to be B minus 1 choose K minus 1 times R choose N minus K divided by how many
balls do we have left? I have R plus B minus 1 left and I am picking N minus 1 of them.
But if you, so essentially what we get here is that P intersection F is going to be B by
R plus B times B minus 1 choose K minus 1 times R choose N minus K divided by
R plus B minus 1 choose N minus 1. So, this is the same value as we have got above.
So, this is a different explanation for the same value. So, here what implicitly is going on is,
so you have P of E intersection F. So, you can write this as P of E conditioned on F
times probability of F. On the other hand, you can write it as P of E where P of F conditioned on E.
So, you have P of F conditioned on E times probability of E is equal to P of E conditioned on F
times probability of F. So, this is what is called the base rule.
So, this is what we have. So, we can do something more interesting.
Suppose I have a probability of an event E. This probability of an event E, I can write it as
probability of event E conditioned on some event A times probability of A
plus probability of event E conditioned on A complement times probability of A complement.
So, this is yet another axiom that I am writing. So, this is another axiom that I have.
So, either it is conditioned on a particular event A or it is conditioned on its complement.
So, this is what we get. So, what is this? This is nothing but probability of E intersection A
complement and this is nothing but P intersection P of E intersection A.
So, it is easy to see. So, if I write it up in terms of my set theory. So, I have P of E
plus P of A. So, this quantity is equal to P of E minus P of E union A. What I have here is nothing
but, so what I have here plus P of A complement minus P of E union A complement.
So, now, so there is a repetition of E. So, it is your homework to see
how this repetition could be cancelled from the rest of the terms.
So, what is P plus, so what is this?
So, remind you that this is equal to 1 because of one of the axioms that we have studied before.
So, this part is equal to 1. Then what about these two?
I will leave it to you to work this things out. So, please stare at the Venn diagrams and through
the Venn diagrams you will be able to derive how this axiom can be obtained.
So, for now, I am just taking it as axiom, but it can be derived from the first instance.
Good. So, now, I will come back to this statement where I said probability of F condition on E
can be written as probability of E condition on F times probability of F divided by probability of
E. Now, if I use this axiom that I have above, I can write it as P of E condition on F times
P of F divided by P of E condition on F times probability of F plus probability of E condition
on F complement times probability of F complement. So, this is the base rule that we see in most of
the literature. Does it make sense? So, now, having studied all of this, we will try to apply
this to our Monte-Hall problem. So, let us recall. So, what is the problem there? So, we had,
so, what is the probability
probability of winning
by switching, by switching
condition on
the choice that was made, choice of the contestant
and the host opening the door, host showing
the door. So, this is what you can work out. So, now, let us do this one. So,
probability of the contestant winning with the choice that they have made without switching.
So, let us say there is an evidence that is being displayed by the host. So, this is a hypothesis
made by the contestant.
So, according to base rule, there is nothing but, so, this is the evidence
shown by the host. So, from base rule, this is actually equal to probability of E given H
times probability of H divided by probability of E condition of H
times probability of H plus probability of E condition on H compliment times probability of H
compliment. So, now, so, what is P of E condition on H? So, let us describe these quantities.
What is probability of H? This is equal to 1 by 3. So, this is how the hypothesis of the
contestant is done and then what is probability of H compliment is 2 by 3. Then what is probability of
E condition on H? So, once the contestant has made the choice, the host has to show a door
with a goat behind it. So, this evidence has a probability 1 and similarly probability of E
condition on H compliment is also equal to 1.
So, the host has to show a door with a goat behind it. So, this happens with probability 1 each.
So, what we get here is that probability of host probability of the contestant winning
with his initial hypothesis is 1 times 1 by 3 by 1 times 1 by 3 plus 1 times 2 by 3.
So, this is nothing but 1 by 3. So, what does this say? This says given the evidence by the host,
the contestant wins by sticking to their original decision
is 1 by 3 probability. So, the hypothesis of the contestant is true for the probability of
1 by 3 given the evidence. So, that is the case right now. So, now we have probability of
H compliment condition on C is 2 by 3. So, there is another way of deriving the same thing using
the base rule. So, we will see more examples of this in the next lecture.
