Welcome back.
So, let us look at something more explicitly that we pushed under the carpet last time,
right.
So, suppose we have this sample space which is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 which are the possible
outcomes of a 6-sided dice, right and we consider the event where all the outcomes
were even numbers, right.
So, we had 2, 4, 6 as a possible outcomes and what like correspondingly what we got
was probability of E was half, right.
Implicitly what is happening here is this also equal to the number of elements in the
set E by the total number of elements in S, right.
So, in case of outcomes which are all equally likely, so what we have is the probability
of an event in general, I mean not just this particular situation where you have a dice
and then you are looking at an event which is 2, 4, 6 which are even outcomes.
In a general situation where you have a sample space S and a subset E that you are considering
and you also have this additional criteria that every outcome is equally likely, then
what do we have?
We have probability of E is nothing but the number of elements of the sample space which
fall into E divided by the number of elements in S or I can just say total number of elements,
right.
So, this is a probability for an event if we have considered the setting where the sample
space where all the outcomes are equally likely.
So, for a coin toss, so for a coin toss what do we have?
The probability of heads is equal to the probability of tails is equal to half if both the outcomes
are equally likely.
A prior it is not very clear given a coin whether these outcomes are equally likely
or not, right.
But we want to assume or make an assumption that given a coin both the outcomes are equally
likely.
Suppose if you have an IPL match and you are tossing a coin before the IPL match, so there
is no guarantee that this coin is going to have an equally likely outcome in general
because it depends on a lot of factors.
The precision of this thing or the air or the like which side you start with and a lot
of parameters fit into this.
But we would like to assume for the sake of this IPL match that or any cricket match that
the coin outcome is equally likely.
So there is a value that we assign to the coin, right.
The reality we do not know, right because there is a lot of elements that contribute
to the outcome, right.
So this is something which we have been skipping, pushing under the carpet but we would like
to see it more explicitly, right.
So there is more explicit example that we can actually look at.
So suppose, suppose we have a bag with N balls and only one of them is special
right.
And now we further say that we pick K balls, K balls from this bag.
Now we ask what is the probability that the picked set of balls has this special ball,
right.
So now let us work with the sample space.
So what would the sample space here be?
So here there are two kinds of balls, one is special and the other is non-special, right.
So what do I have?
I have N minus 1 non-special balls and one special ball, right.
So now I can write this as the following.
So I can represent my choices as 0 corresponds to a non-special ball, 1 corresponds to the
special ball.
Now my sample space is going to be the strings, some string E belong to 0, 1 to the K, it
is 0, 1 to the K such that the number of 1's in E is at most 1, right.
So this is my sample space.
So what is this the experiment is I have N balls in the bag and I am picking K balls
out of them, right.
So here out of this K balls all K of them could be non-special or K minus 1 of them
are non-special and one of them is a special ball, right.
So now if I actually look at the event that I am interested in, this event that is nothing
but I have all those vectors E prime belong to 0, 1 to the K such that there is exactly
one location which is 1, right.
So to make it more explicit, so I will have I could have one in the first position, then
I could have one in the second position, then I could have one in the third position and
so on, right.
So this is my event that I am interested in.
So I want to have the special ball in the K balls that I pick, right.
So here there is all possible cases where I have one special ball and the rest of them
are non-special because I have K picks.
So this length of this vector is K, right.
So now so what is the probability of event E, right.
So now each of this like an each of these balls is equally likely when I pick, right.
So what would I have?
Let us concentrate on this part, just so I am going to write this as the following.
So it is summation over all E prime such that E prime belongs to the set E, have probability
of E prime, right.
And we will consider one particular E prime which is probability of 1, 0, 0 until.
So what is this?
We are picking the special ball first, how many special balls do I have?
1.
And how many balls do I have overall?
I have n.
And then I have how many how many balls do I have left, how many non-special balls do
I have left?
n minus 1, right.
I have n minus 1.
So how many balls are left?
n minus 1 and so on, right.
So then whatever the second one, I have n minus 1 special balls, sorry n minus 1 non-special
balls and I am picking this one here and then I have 1 minus, right.
So each of this, so some element here is going to be n minus i by n minus i and so
on until 1 and similarly n minus i by n minus i and so on until 1, right.
For each of this my value is going to be 1 by n, right.
For each of these elements I am going to have, so I am going to have 1 by n, right.
So if I actually sum this up, I am going to get summation over E prime belong to E, I
have 1 by n.
How many elements are there in the set E?
So I claim that the number of elements in the set E is given by the value k because
the number of elements is given by the possibilities of having one in a particular location in
the k length vector, right.
So how many vectors of this form are possible?
They are exactly k of them, right.
So if I put them together what I will get is it is k by n.
So this makes sense?
So the probability of picking a special ball in the k balls that you actually picked is
k by n.
The other way to look at it is nothing but the other way to compute this directly is
I have one special ball, I am choosing it in 1 choose 1 case and then I have n minus
1 special balls, I am choosing k minus 1 there and how many do I have overall, I have n choose
k, right.
This is a direct application of the formula.
So what do I get here, I have n minus 1 factorial divided by n minus k factorial and k minus
1 factorial divided by I have n factorial by n minus k factorial times k factorial,
right.
So what do you get here?
I have k factorial by k minus 1 factorial times n minus 1 factorial.
So I have n minus 1 factorial by n factorial, right.
This is nothing but k by n, right.
So we are obtaining the same value using two different procedures, right.
So always working out with first principles will actually give you an idea of what exactly
is happening underneath.
You can use your shortcut formulas, so nobody is stopping you from doing that.
But working out from the first principles gives you much more intuition about how this
probability works.
So let us look at another example, right.
So let us look at this.
Suppose I have, if we have a deck of 52 cards, right.
So 52 cards, they are divided into 4 sets, right, 4 sets of 13 cards each, right.
So what do you mean by 4 sets?
So you have a diamond, diamond set of 13, so 13 of these diamonds, 13 of whatever you
have hearts, you have cloves and you have spades, right.
So I have 13 of each, right and these are the red colored set and these are the black
colored set, right.
So now the first question I pose is, so what is the probability, so what is the probability
that 3 cards are red and 3 cards are black if 6 cards are picked, right.
So here we will assume that all cards are equally likely, right, good.
So now how do you approach this?
So again you can write your sample space, you can write your sample space for this.
See I am going to consider these cards now as either red or black, right.
So now what I have is a vector whose elements, again I can consider 0 to correspond to red
and 1 to correspond to black, right.
So now my sample space for this experiment, a simplified experiment.
So I am simplifying my view of the sample space.
So I am going to consider this vectors E belong to 0 and power 6.
So this is my sample space, so I can just write it as 0, 1, power 6.
So that is this corresponds to all vectors of length 6.
So why are we actually choosing vectors?
So vectors actually ensure that the positions are, like you know the sanctity of the positions
or the integrity of positions is maintained, right.
if I have, so I want to distinguish between 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1 from 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, right.
So here by using the vector notation I am going to say that my second pick is a black
instead of red, right.
So these two are distinct.
So using the vector notation actually ensures that the sequences that are being considered
are distinct, right.
So let us erase this part, which is, so now what is my event?
My event is I have three picks which are white and three picks which are black, right.
So now I am going to look at the vectors E in the set 0, 1 to the 6 such that number
of 0s is equal to number of 1s, right.
So what is the probability here?
The probability of event E is nothing but summation over all vectors E, probability
of this vector E, right.
So let us consider one particular event.
So let us say I consider this 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1.
So what is this?
I have 52 cards overall where 26 of them are red and 26 of them are black.
I am going to pick, first I am going to pick red cards.
So I have 26 red out of 52.
Then I have 25 red out of 51.
Then I have 24 red out of 50, 50.
Now I have 49 cards left.
Out of these 49 cards, I have still 26 black.
I have 25 black now and then I have 24 black, right.
So this is what I get.
Now the second thing is I can actually consider the next sequence which is 1, 0, 0.
So what is this?
I have 26 black, sorry 26 red and 26 black.
I am going to pick one card out of that, right.
So here implicitly we are using this notation where I have some special elements and I am
actually picking one out of the special elements, right.
So I have this.
So I have 20, no, the next pick is a black card.
I have 26 black cards.
Now I am picking one black card out of it.
Then I have 25 red cards.
So I have this.
So please be careful when I actually, so again I am doing red card.
Then what am I doing next?
I am actually picking a black card.
So how many black cards do I have?
I have 25 of them, right.
So now what I get here is this into 24 of 47, right.
You can keep working things out.
How many such things are there?
So how many such elements E are there?
So this cardinality of this element set E is, so I need exactly three 0s and three 1s.
Now I can pick in which place I have those three, right.
So as it turns out for each of this element E, the probability of E is 26 into 25 into
24 squared by 52 into 51 into 50 into 49 into 48 into 47, right.
So let us put this all together.
What do I have?
I have 6 choose 3 times this value whatever I have here.
So I am going to just, right.
So this is what I get.
So let us use the other method to get the same value.
So the other method to get this is the following.
So I have 26 red cards out of which I am choosing 3 and I have 26 black cards out of
which I am choosing 3 and I have 52 cards overall and I am choosing 6 out of them, right.
So now let us open this up.
So I have 26 factorial by 23 factorial times 3 factorial into 26 factorial by 23 factorial
times 3 factorial divided by 52 factorial by 46 factorial times 6 factorial.
So if you work things out, so what you would get above, so from this and this you would
get this part, right.
From this you would get this part and by combining this, so just look at this part.
So this will give you 6 choose 3, right.
So this is an equivalent way of getting what we have, right.
So going by first principles tells you more about what your random process is, right.
So this is where we will stop and in the assignment you would have more of these questions, right.
Just think about these questions and practice them from the first principles.
