Welcome back to Python core and applied concepts for a level data sense workflow.
In this session, we will discuss briefly about different types of programming error that
occur more frequently when we try to write no programming in Python programming language
or in general in any programming language.
So before we go to the programming errors, let's pause for a moment on this slide and
try to see a very important evolving pattern in today's programming paradigm.
So this picture is trying to highlight the evolving role of a coder in contemporary
programming practices where most of us are using LLM to generate our first draft of code.
So if you think a little bit carefully, in past two decades, learning a programming language
means learning the syntax and semantics of programming language and mostly we were
used to writing our code from very splash.
We used to learn the syntax and semantics and then try to write code for our purpose
without any external help.
But with the advent of LLM since these are models, probabilistic model trained on
a large repository of code base, we somehow tend to believe on the code that has been
generated by these LLMs and we normally query these LLM with natural language from to
get our first draft of the code.
So that's perfectly acceptable thing to get your first draft of code using these LLM.
But then if you are a serious programmer, the owners of validation or making sure that
the code behaves the way you wanted it to behave lies with you.
Now with the presence of LLM where you are not investing your time in writing this
code from scratch, it's even more desirable that you at least validate the code that has
been generated by some like LLM or any other agent.
So going ahead, our responsibility as a validator is even more since we are relying on
a third party like LLM to generate our first piece of code.
Now let's come back to the type of programming error that can occur when we are writing a
program.
The very first type of programming error are called syntax error.
So this syntax error caused when you violate the syntax rule of the programming language.
So let's say if you are trying to write a program which is not following one of the syntactical
rule of creation of either loads of expression or a statement in the programming language, then
you will certainly hit this syntax error.
But the good news is that compilers are good at catching this syntax error mostly because
this syntax error has been defined very formally in Python reference manual.
That's how compiler writers can be very clear about what is accepted as a valid program
and what is not accepted as a valid program.
And hence compiler will complain and it will not let you go ahead with running your
programs if there is a syntax error.
So this is kind of a very easy type of error which are somewhere here which is easily
visible to you.
Even if you let's say make this mistake or a LLM make this mistake, compiler will complain
and you will be able to identify this bug.
And then repair from those bugs, you can actually debug these kind of bugs.
But the other two types of bugs which are runtime errors and semantics error are
a little difficult and syntax error to catch and even recover from.
So what are runtime errors?
So imagine a scenario where your compiler did not complain and it gave you a
clinch to go ahead and then run your program.
But since your compiler did not complain about any structural invalidity,
it does not mean that your program will always run properly and complete its execution.
Sometimes due to some corner cases of user input, it may crash at the runtime.
For example, a very simple program to calculate the division of one number by another number.
You might not check whether the denominator is non-zero.
In that case, if you have written a function not taking into account this kind of scenario,
then when a user gives argument where the second argument is zero,
at the runtime your program will crash because division by zero is not defined.
So this kind of error can also come and they cannot be caught at the compilation time
because the program followed all the syntax rule of the language.
But at the runtime it may produce some error or some crash which is unexpected.
So that's why I mean to become a good programmer we should be able to not only predict
this kind of runtime unexpected behavior but also we should take care of these
unexpected behavior inside our code by writing proper exception handling mechanism
or blocks which gracefully handle this kind of unexpected scenario.
So these runtime errors are a little more subtle than syntax error,
but still I mean with practice you can learn how to handle this kind of runtime error.
Now coming to the third kind of error which we call semantic error.
I mean this is the most difficult type of error.
And the difficulty comes from again what we discussed in the previous class
from the ambiguity in the semantics because you know the semantic rules are not that clear.
So what we rely on is our overall understanding of what is the semantics of the program.
So when you start writing a program you have some intention in your mind
and you want to map that intention into a set of or sequencer instruction that you write in your program.
Now let's say your compiler does not complain about the structural validity of the program
and your program also runs to completion and produces result.
So simply because it could run to completion and produce some result does not mean
that the result is what you wanted to calculate.
There can be a misalignment between what is produced as an output
and what you intended to produce as an output.
So this is called semantic error because I mean there is a gap between what you wanted program to calculate
and what the program actually calculates.
Although the program is syntax tickly correct and has no runtime error occurring,
it does not guarantee that it will be solving the same problem that you wanted this program to solve.
It will be computing the same value that you wanted it to compute.
So this is the most difficult kind of error which may lie deep down your code
and even most proficient coder often make this mistake and they cannot figure out these kind of bugs and then debug it.
Now in conclusion what we want to emphasize is that it's very important to understand the precise semantics
and this is probably the most desired skill going ahead when we are relying on LLM to produce our first draft of code.
For watching this video I will see you in the next video till then goodbye.
