Hello and welcome back to the Python Core and Applied Concepts.
In this video we will talk about the very basics of Act of Programming.
So we will try to understand the Act of Programming by asking some very basic questions around
this.
For example, let's try to understand and try to understand and answer this first question
which is why do we write programs?
So I mean if you think carefully why do we want to write programs?
So we want to write programs to get some work done.
So when we say we want to get some work done, we mean we want to get some computational
work done by some machines.
So that's why we want to write programs.
Normally those tasks for which you want to write programs should be doable manually.
You should be able to, let's say if there is no computer or no machine available to
you, you should be able to write mechanical procedure or you should be able to do that
computation manually using pen and paper also.
So since these manual process may be very tiresome, they may be very cumbersome, exhausting
and monotonous, not so interesting act.
That's why we normally want to relegate this kind of activity of computing some functions
or some output that you want to compute based on some, let's say data, you want to relegate
these kind of things to computers.
So I mean we want to write program because we want to relegate these somewhat mechanical
and boring task to machines which can, you know, perform maybe these tasks in a much
faster way than a human can do and also, you know, in a more precise way, it can calculate
those things that we wanted to produce.
So that's why we write program.
So one thing to note here is that we can only, you know, write programs and get things
done for those kind of tasks for which we know the recipe to do those tasks, okay.
So if you do not know the procedure to calculate something or compute something, you cannot
instruct computers to do those things.
So this is one of the very important criteria that we can only, you know, write program
to do those kind of tasks which we can, you know, manually do.
It requires manual and manual understanding of the task and also a mechanical procedure
to accomplish this task, then only we can relegate these to computers.
Now coming to the next question, you know, what are we programming?
So when we say we are writing a program or we are doing the act of programming, at the
other end is a real computer and real computers nothing but real machines which we are trying
to program, okay.
So in the process of programming, we are trying to instruct these real machines to do some
computation that we desire to, you know, perform, okay.
So you know, so what are we programming finally?
So we are actually programming these real machines and therefore it's very important to understand
the interaction with this hardware properly.
If you want to convey your intention to compute something to these computers, then, you
should understand this process of, you know, communication in a much more precise way,
okay.
So this brings us to our, you know, next question, what is a program, okay.
So a program is then a mean or a method to communicate your desire of computation to
these real machines that we call computer, okay.
So we can communicate our, you know, intention to compute something by writing a program,
you know, to these computers.
So programs are sequence of instructions, they communicate computational intent to machines
and therefore understanding, you know, this communication is essential, you know,
are we communicating properly what we desire to compute to these machines is essential
to, you know, the act of programming.
So this brings us to our, you know, final question.
So what is a programming language?
So as we, you know, discuss just now that we write programs to communicate our intention.
But then, so what is the language in which we can write these programs, okay.
So like, you know, if I want to communicate with you, I use some natural language like,
you know, English, Hindi or any other language.
But then if I want to communicate my intention to computer, I would like to write a program.
But what will be the language which I use for writing this program?
So these languages are called programming languages, okay.
So programming languages are like natural languages, which gives us a, you know, way to communicate
our desire, which we call, you know, program to these real machines.
But there is a distinction between, you know, natural languages and programming languages.
So in programming languages, we cannot be ambiguous.
We have to be very precise.
In natural languages, when you are talking or communicating to, you know, your friend,
you have already, you know, built-in context in which you communicate.
So therefore, I mean, you can afford to be a little unambiguous and still your friend
at the other end will be able to, you know, disambiguate what you have said and make
sense of it.
But computers don't have a common context of, you know, communication with you.
So whatever you want to convey, you have to be very explicit and very precise in that.
And programming languages, you know, gives us a mean to be precise and explicit in our
communication.
So these are like natural languages, but these are, you know, more formal in the sense
that they are very precise.
There are, you know, very strict rules of what you can write and you cannot write, you
know, in a programming language.
And there are very, you know, strict definition of what will be the meaning of what you write
as a valid program.
Okay?
So there are very precise mathematical rules to define both the structure of a valid program
and also the meaning of a valid program.
Okay?
So these two, you know, aspects of programming languages are called normally syntax and
semantics of, you know, programming languages.
So, you know, in a summary, what is a programming language?
It's a formal language for writing program so that we can, you know, convey our computationally
intention to machines and this, you know, enables communication between us and computers.
And these programming languages should be defined in such a way so that there is no ambiguity
that we normally have in our natural languages.
Now there, you know, the programming languages can, can be categorized in a, you know, variety
of, you know, different level, you know, the very low level programming languages are
those programming languages, which are very close to how machine works.
Okay?
So, you can communicate your intention to machines by knowing how machine actually perform these
now operations.
So, if you are trying to communicate your intention in that way, then you will be using
a low level programming languages, which are like an assembly level languages, which very
closely resemble what happens inside the real computer.
But then for most of us, it's not that easy to understand the whole mechanism of computation
inside a computer and being able to, you know, convey our intention in form of those
computation.
So, we prefer, you know, most of the programmers, you know, prefer to write programs in a high
level programming languages where things are more, you know, close to, you know, natural
languages.
And it's very easy to make sense of, you know, what, you know, we are trying to communicate
to computer and then really get the, you know, task of translating, you know, these high
level instruction to the low level, you know, exact instruction, which machine can execute
to interpreter or compilers.
So, you know, this is the distance between low level and high level.
So just to summarize in, you know, low level programming, you know, languages, we work with
exact machines, which you can see on the, you know, left hand side and, you know, for
that we need to understand how these exact machine work, how, you know, memory addresses
are handled and how, you know, data flows between memory and, you know, computing units inside
the computer.
So, if you know exactly which instructions, I mean, in assembly language can help us trigger
these events, then we can actually write programs in low level programming languages.
But on the other hand, I mean, most of us normally, you know, prefer something, you know,
like, you know, right hand side where we work with a high level programming languages.
And these high level programming languages help you abstract out the exact details of
this machine and you can, you know, in mind, always assume for any given programming language
that there is an abstract machine, which is far more simpler than the real machine in
terms of, you know, thinking.
So, these abstract machine helps you, you know, handle most of the complexities of this
real machine by abstracting out these registers, memory and, you know, these computations
in form of variable and high level data structure and how those variables are, you know, manipulated
by different instructions in program.
So, you know, in a sense, you can reason about the final output or the result of execution
of program correctly, but without getting bothered about what's happening at a very low
level.
So, if you write a program in a high level programming language, this programming languages
give you enough feature to abstract out unnecessary, let's say, details, which is not necessary
to, you know, think about if you're, you know, concerned about the logic of your program
or, you know, your program being computing the logical functions on those input data,
then you can actually focus on these high level programming languages.
Python is one such programming languages and hence, I mean, it gives us a nice abstraction
where we can get rid of most of these low level details and we can just focus on the
program logic and write correct program to achieve some computational.
So, just to summarize, low level languages interact directly with hardware, which we call
exact machines, low level code provides you fine-grained control because, you know, exactly
how, you know, computer works, so you can actually instruct them in their language, immediate
language.
So, most of the time, you can be very efficient in translating your intention to what
machine need to do to let's say, achieve those computational desire.
On the other hand, high level languages offer greater abstraction, right?
We have a simpler, you know, machine which we call abstract machine and high level code
normally emphasizes on human readability and Python is one such, you know, high level
programming language.
So, this is, again, the same thing in, you know, one picture if we want to say things.
So, we are going from these exact machines, which are real machines, which will finally
perform the computation, but in order to convey our, you know, computational desire to these
exact machines, we don't need to always, you know, write instruction in the language,
which is very close to these machines.
We can write programs in a high level, you know, programming languages and all of this
can be translated easily to these languages by the interpreter and compiler.
So, this gives us, you know, extreme freedom and, you know, this improves our capability
to reason about the input output behavior of program at a very high level without getting
bothered about what's happening at the low level at a computer.
So, this is a quick recap of what we discussed today.
So, we program real computers, which are physical machines and therefore programs are sequence
of instructions for, you know, these machines and these instructions in a way communicate
our computational desire to these computers, computers.
And normally the languages which you use for, you know, conveying this computational
desire are called programming languages and they can be roughly categorized into low
level programming language and high level programming languages.
Low level languages are very close to machine, but they are very difficult to write programming.
That's why we move to high level programming languages, which gives us, you know, enough
abstraction to make our life easy and write, you know, meaningful complex programs which
can be executed on these real machines.
So, please take your time and reflect on these ideas, so we will meet in the next video
till then, goodbye.
