Hello and welcome back to Python Core and Applied Concepts for Reliable Data Sins workflow.
In today's session, we will try to locate Python in the overall landscape of programming
language paradigms.
We will also discuss some of its core strength and weaknesses in regard to the broader programming
language in a landscape.
So this slide shows some of the core strength of Python.
So let us briefly go through them one by one.
The very first set of principles, which are also known as gen principles, are the set
of principles which Python developers have maintained from the very beginning.
And probably that's also one of the major reason why this programming language has
become so popular and it has attracted so many programmers towards itself.
This gen principles actually tries to summarize these very important features of 90 programming
language.
So it tries to give importance to readability in a programming language.
So we want to write code that's easy to read and understand, improving collaboration
and maintenance.
So if you notice, when we will come to coding in Python, you will notice the Python awards
unnecessary curly braces and those kind of construct which are not easy to read.
Instead, it relies on a lot of indentation, which is visually quite appealing and by just
looking at the structure of the code, the visual appearance is so nice that you can make
out which of the blocks are written together.
It avoids unnecessary curly braces, semicolon kind of thing and then tries to use indentation
in a proper way so that the code is more readable by just looking at the visual structure
of the code.
You can make out a lot about the semantic structure of the code as well.
So this was the first point in which Python scores are quite high.
The second important feature that developers try to maintain is try to be simple and straightforward
when writing code.
I mean, instead of doing some tricky things, I mean Python principles actually advocates
to use simplicity.
I mean, you be straightforward and clear in what you are writing.
And instead of being implicit in your code, you try to be always explicit about what you
want to do through this code.
So these three important features of readability, simplicity and explicitly, explicitness makes
Python more attractive for programmers want to write and develop code fast and accurately.
The second most important thing in Python is that it very nicely blends these three programming
paradigm which is known as imperative object oriented and functional.
So it inherits some of the property of object oriented programming as well as function programming.
So inherently, it's an imperative programming language where you can define variables,
you can change the value of variables and so on.
But you can also define classes and instantiate them with objects inside Python.
So whether you are used to working in an imperative programming paradigm or an object oriented
paradigm or purely functional paradigm, you will always find something familiar when you
migrate to Python.
Maybe this is also one of the reason why many people accepted Python as their language
of choice because it brings all these features in a nice way.
The other important feature of Python is that Python already has a very rich ecosystem
which consists of comprehensive standard library and extensive third-party modules that
you can immediately start using from the very first day you start writing programming
Python.
For example, in some of the very popular packages that people use when they were with
you know, data science in Mumbai, Panda and there is an extensive ecosystem which support
data science and machine learning kind of activity inside, you know, while being inside
Python.
So that's how Python becomes even more popular among those who want to use it as a language
to develop, you know, serial data science, you know, projects.
Again, to summarize, I mean, there are several factors contributing to Python's popularity.
I have listed here a few of them such as, you know, Jain of Python which, you know, emphasizes
on readability and simplicity, its multi paradigm nature where it, you know, very nicely blends
all these, you know, imperative object oriented and functional programming in style inside
the same language.
Then you have, you know, comprehensive standard library that you can, you know, start using
from the very first day.
Also you can easily extend the modules of, you know, Python to incorporate some new feature.
In particular, in the data science domain, I mean, we have a very extensive, you know,
rich library that makes the job of building any serious data science project very, you
know, easy and manageable inside the Python polycosystem.
All that said, not everything is, you know, good with Python, Python also comes with some
disadvantage.
And especially if you are not writing programs carefully, then you will, you know, hit
these one of these issues.
But the very first issue is that Python can do significantly, you know, more energy than
see.
And all these stats are based on the average user.
If you don't write programs, you know, properly and, you know, make it efficient.
On an average, you will consume 76 times more energy than see, you will, you know, end
up consuming, you know, more memory in Python, if you know, compare it to see.
And then due to its not interpreted nature of Python, in here is an inherently slower.
Okay.
So also, I mean, Python is, you know, dynamically type, which prevents, you know, some very,
you know, important compiler optimization that is present when you don't have dynamic
typing in the programming language.
So these are some of the, you know, pitfalls or you can say disadvantage of Python, and
especially, I mean, these kind of things affect you more if you are not programming, you
know, carefully, you know, that said, I mean, there are always ways to mitigate, you know,
these advantages by writing program a little carefully where I mean, Python provides, you
know, options of being, you know, careful, for example, I mean, some of the options, you
know, one of the, you know, good option is, you know, optional typing, although, I mean,
it's a dynamically typed language, you can sign types to, you know, variable and expression
and that helps it, you know, reduce some of these effects.
Also there is, you know, just in time compilation possible using, you know, number and Python,
which we will discuss later on in the course.
There is also static compilation, you know, possible, which improves performance.
And you know, Python provides some concurrency and efficient data structure that you can
use effectively to improve the performance of your overall program.
Also, if you, you know, handle the error gracefully, you know, inside the Python ecosystem,
you will have, you can avoid many crashes and hence, you know, you can save a lot of energy.
So although, so, I mean, in a nutshell, I mean, while Python comes with this advantage,
it also provides you options to mitigate some of these disadvantages by being a little
more careful in writing program and analyzing your program.
So I'd like to conclude this session by giving you an overview of the whole course structure.
So right now, I assume you to be, you know, a beginner with some or no prior Python, you
know, familiarity.
So slowly, we will, you know, dive deep into the core programming elements present in
the Python from the next session onward.
We will start with the syntax, you know, data types, you know, loops, you know, it's
iteration kind of thing and then we will, you know, move to how to define, you know,
functions, modules, which make your code, you know, more abstract and manageable.
And we will end this course with a, you know, data science concrete data science project
where I will discuss this project in detail with you and we will try to come up with
the complete solution for this, you know, project.
So at the end of this course, you can expect to learn a lot of, you know, data science tools
and techniques, which are already present in library and how to build a data science workflow
from the stretch inside this Python ecosystem.
In this slide, we can see the overall course structure in a little bit more detail where,
you know, we start with the introduction to Python programming, which is what we have
already covered.
We go to the formal syntax and the core, you know, construct inside, you know, Python programming
language and then we will discuss about, you know, how to, you know, look, how to write
loops, you know, properly inside Python.
Once we learn this, we will go to, you know, lists and related algorithms, then we move
to functions and later on we go and see how to, you know, handle this runtime error that
I was talking about.
I mean, how to write properly, you know, exception handling code inside Python.
We then move on to, you know, higher end, some higher end concept like recurs and dictionary
data structure and we would try to bring some real, you know, example of data structure
where recursion and dictionary becomes really, you know, useful.
So, you know, at this point in time, in our course, we will introduce you to one data
sense, you know, project and this project will help you understand how to design a overall,
you know, ML workflow inside Python itself, okay.
So, we will do some very, you know, foundational, you know, steps of any ML workflow like
exploratory data analysis, you know, machine learning and we will learn about the overall
machine learning pipeline.
I mean, how to create a model, how to train a model, how to hyper, do hyper, do hyper
parameter tuning and then after you get a model, how to, you know, do post model analysis
to figure out whether your model is reasonable or not.
So, this course is designed in a way so that I mean, you start from the very, you know,
basic and we go to a point where we can build a whole ML workflow from, you know, scratch
inside the Python ecosystem itself.
So, I hope, I mean, you will enjoy this learning process, wishing you all the best for upcoming
lecture from the next lecture onward.
We will dive deep into the core Python, you know, syntax and semantics.
So, that's until then, goodbye.
I will see you in the next video.
Bye.
