Hello and welcome back to Python core and applied concepts for reliable data sense workflow.
In today's video we are going to look into the minute details of Python's type system,
which are often neglected by beginner programmers in Python.
Without further delay let's get into the slides.
So this is in a nutshell what we are going to discuss in some detail.
We are going to talk about Python's type system, which has these three interesting property,
which are called dynamic typing, strong typing and optionally static typing.
So the first two features, dynamic typing and strong typing somehow helps us get the program
developed very fast. So it somehow helps us in developing program very fast because Python is
flexible in how you can instantiate variable and how you can change type of those variables
dynamically. Many of the programming languages does not have this feature. Once you define a type
or associated type to a variable, you cannot change it later on. But unlike them, Python,
for example, in this case, dynamic typing can see you can instantiate a variable with
integer type and then let it happily assign it a string type. This is possible because Python
compiler and interpreter allows that since Python developer thought this will help in speeding
up the development of program quickly. So another feature which we will talk about is strong
typing. Although I mean Python allows dynamic typing, it does not mean that Python is weekly type.
I mean in the sense that it will not allow different types or incompatible type of object to be
joined by some operator which expects some different types. So type is not checked strongly at the
time when you are making complicated expression out of simple expression using some operator.
And then there is a third option which we call optionally static typing which is present again
in Python which one can use to the benefit of writing a reliable code. And also to help
fear some static analysis tool to figure out some possible errors that it can hint you and then
you can recover early on. So now it's time to again move to Jupyter notebook and see some
hands on exploration around this topic to understand these things in a more clear way because
these things are real. So let's move to the Jupyter notebook and try to observe the slight differences
between these concepts surrounding Python's type system. So let us now go to the
Jupyter notebook and this is the section that we are on Jupyter notebook. So let me
take you through this Jupyter notebook to explain this silent feature of Python's type system.
The very first one is called dynamic typing. So dynamic typing gives you the freedom of
late binding. I mean you should not be worried about the type of variable or you should not
bind the type of variables too tightly with the variable itself. So a variable is just a label
that can be attached to any type of object. So this is what this dynamic typing means. So the
type is associated with object and not with no variable. So variables are associated to these
objects and objects that type. So if you let's associate a variable to a different object it
types automatically changes. So the variable is just a name tag that can reference different type.
So for instance I mean let me write a very simple code where I say instantiate this variable x
with value 5. So in this case I mean you can see if you do this instantiation that x is an
integral right. So if you print x you will get x as an integer if you print the type of
x you will get no let me know. You see when we assign x value 5 and when print we say
we get the type of x no as integer. But you know immediately after this statement we can also
we are allowed to write this kind of statement where I assign a string value to this no variable.
So now x is no string which is a perfectly valid thing to do in Python. Initially you started
x with a value which has no type integer and now you are reassigning another type of object to
the same variable x and after this if you again try to go through this print
type of x. So compiler does not complain and what you get is the new type that is associated with
the object to which this variable x no reference to. So we can easily reassign different objects
to the same variable and once you reassign a different object then its type no is the type of
the variable. So this is very important thing the type checking happens at runtime not at compile
time and it enables rapid prototyping and polymorphic codes. So these are some of the pros that you
can build code very quickly without worrying about the type. Otherwise in programming language like
you have to think in a very big what type you are going to assign a particular variable and then
you cannot change that run. So these things are not so easy to do in other programming languages
but here in Python you can see you can this is a perfectly valid thing to do. But the
columns are that type related errors can only be discovered when the specific line of code is
being done. So it may cause also problems and some errors in the code which will not be
easy to detect when you are developing the code it can only be caught when you are running the code
because this type checking happens or type assignment happens only at the runtime. So this is
a very important thing to keep in mind. So then there is this another concept of strong typing.
Although Python allows you to assign different types of object to the same variable when you
go along the program but it always ensures that the types are checked properly. So operations on
objects are checked strictly. For instance here I mean you cannot so if you see this
if you see this a particular expression where I am trying to add and string to integer Python
will not do any implicit conversion of integers to string or string to integer and then accept
this kind of ill form expressions. So this will cause a type error and it will say that
string can only be concatenated to string. Python does not silently convert either string 5 to
integer 5 or the integer 5 to string 5. Unlike weekly type language example in JavaScript that
perform implicit conversion Python doesn't allow this. So the key distinction between dynamic and
strong typing is that dynamic means flexible in what a variable can be. So that's why we begin
call dynamic that the type of the variable can later on change depending upon what object it is
referencing to. But strong here when we say strong typing is strong means rigid in what operations
are allowed on those objects. So for example if you just copy paste the same thing if you want to
run this program here inside Python. So if you try to run I mean so this is the error that you
can only concatenate string not into the string. So this is what we call strong typing although
it allows you flexibility of changing the type but at any moment of time when you are building
a complex operation using simpler expression of different type then the operator should respect
that. I mean if operator does not expect different types as input to build complex expression then
you cannot give like I mean this no plus operator you know expect either both be string or both be
you know integer. So it you know complains you so this is what we call strong typing.
So this is the core principle that objects have a defined type okay and operations are checked
for compatibility between types. So while defining operation you normally define what type of
object it will not take as input to produce what type of no other object. So there is no implicit
type no conversion that you know occurs in Python okay. So so this prevents you know hidden silent
bugs the program fails you know fast and loudly when types are mixed incorrectly forcing the
programmer to explicitly state their intent. So this is no this is strong typing is very you know
interesting because it will not let this kind of you know error go down you know go unnoticed.
It will the compiler will complain early on. So that's why you know this is strong typing is a very
nice feature to have. Now the third very important property that I want to talk today is optional
aesthetic typing although Python does not enforce you to assign a type for a variable or a function
you can optionally do it okay. And the advantage of you know assigning types to any variable
you know early on is that it can help compiler optimize in certain ways okay. So it can allow
compiler to do a lot of optimizations which will not be possible otherwise. So that's why these
optional typing are important. So and we should do it whenever we feel we are certain about the type
and you know we want the program to only restrict to input or values of this variable of a certain type
okay. For example I mean in this case you know you can actually let's say you know if you are
declaring a name I mean a variable name which will have this value as a string you can also
say explicitly here that you are expecting a string value here okay. Similarly for count I mean
no this int is optional but we can tell the compiler that we are going to keep here an int okay.
So this is not mandatory that's why we are calling it optional aesthetic typing you know even if
you don't provide it no compile can figure out what is the type of this variable by just looking
at the object which is being assigned. No last object that has been assigned to the variable but
you can do it additionally here I mean if you feel I mean you are going to use this you know
variable in this certain way then you can actually assign it. And then I mean let's say
if you know put a string into the name variable which also has a type you know a string
explicitly my mentioned here and similarly count has a type int explicitly mentioned here with
a value of 42 now what if I define a function of this form no I am defining a function which is
no greeting someone with this whole purpose of this function is to print you know this line that
hello whatever name you give us you know input and in the name you expect a string right so this
is how we can say or annotate type information in the argument also right this is a function
definition and this you know name is the argument so the optional type that I have mentioned here
is this you know this is string I could have left it but here let's say for this particular example
I'm saying that it will take a string as an input and you know written as a string as an output
why because you know you can see the 10 type is you know again a string okay so we can define
something you know like this here but defining something like this at this place no does not
ensure that you know Python compiler wait let's say or is you know bound to follow your
optional typing I mean this is what you are telling I mean your intention but it is not bound to
you know follow this for example let me you know try to you know run this same piece of code that
we are trying to okay so let me copy and paste this definitions here no in the code block so if
in the code block if I copy so I have defined name variable count variable and the function greet
not all all here right I mean so so we so no so we know normal understanding you know let's say
if I want to now execute this greet function okay if I want to know execute no greet function
and if I pass you know my name let's say to this greet function my name is
Abyssaic so what do I expect so so this is what I expect right hello we say so this is what
we were printing okay so it took a string and it returned a string but I mean this you know
remember I mean this is optional in Python so what if what do you expect if I let's say pass
the same function greet instead of a string what if I you know pass it a number like say you know
42 the select you know complain with a type error or syntax error something like this or
especially except this and print something so what's your guess okay so let's try to know run it
and see what's the real so you see I mean Python does not complain right so this is this might
look surprising to some people know if it does not you know complain then what's the point of
you know giving it a type right I mean I have declared it as a the argument to be a string type
right I mean in this example if you look at the greet functions argument which is name which I
want to be string but here I have no past 42 and we just saw that no Python does not do implicit
conversion so it's not also the case that 42 has been converted into a string and then this function
greet has accepted this as a you know valid input it's not you know it's not the case actually
here okay so so why it still runs because Python ignores type hints during execution if it
you know finds that the argument is not not of the type that was you know mentioned so then also
it will accept it okay and dynamically it will try to you know assign type and you know use it okay
so so this is why I mean we are calling it you know optional typing so this is not not only
no optional from our side so always I mean giving type is always optional from our side but Python is
all compiler is also you know free to ignore this type hints during execution if it finds you know
if it can infer some no let's say valid type for the no argument that can let the function go
with that type then it will actually allow it okay so my Python is not bound to follow this no
optional type information that you provide okay so then I mean as we said I mean compiler gets
benefit of some kind sort of optimization and also some static analysis tool which now just look
at the structure of the code and tries to tell you whether there can be some chances of error
or not or can they can there be some sort of you know error or probable error in the program
they can also infer a lot of information from this you know optional typing so that's very
although I mean this is not a mandatory thing for compiler to follow we normally advocate using
these optional type as much as possible so that you get you know good hints you know very early
on about possible errors in or bugs in your program okay so the static analysis tools which are
you know most of which are you know embedded in most of the ID and they can help you figure out some
you know runtime error or some other sort of error by using this no type hints so these are hints
for these you know linters and ID but these are not something mandatory for the compiler to follow
and Python interpreter you know or compiler ignores them not runtime so but I mean again I mean
using this you know types also is you know helping us validate the code right our intention to
some extent right because if you are writing code if you know what this particular input or this
particular variable is intended to do so assigning a type to a variable is also like assigning
partial meaning to another program okay although we have not assigned full meaning to the program
but we are assigning you know partial meaning or somehow we are conveying our partial
intention by assigning these optional types to this variable so this is also you know very much
alliance with our intention in this program in this lecture series that we should have this
you know validator mindset and we should try to employ that always I mean and whenever possible
use tools and techniques available in the language that can help us you know validate either
fully or partially the correctness of our program okay so this is all so in the nutshell
no Python combines dynamic typing with the strong typing while offering optional static
type hints for development you know tooling so these optional static types are more useful for
compiler and these you know linters this is static analysis tool which can figure out many you
know error in the code early on if you provide enough type information as no optional types
so Python remains so just to summarize you know Python remains dynamically type
better on time so you can you know build code very fast okay but it also gives you you know this
optional static typing for development now this maintains both the flexibility of building code
fast while enabling reliability whenever let's say we want you know our code to be not trustworthy
and you know we are dealing with a critical code then we would love to write as many optional
type as possible so that it can help static analysis tool figure out some of the program error
and convey it to us in no so that we can repair those error or you know debug those error earlier
but type hints are you know like formula specification of your you know you know functions
contract so you know although you're not telling what is the exact nature of you know input
output or the relationship between input output of the function that you're expecting at least
you're not telling some partial information about what are the types of the input and output that
is expected by this function so although this is not a complete you know formula specification
this is a partial you know specification of your intention of computing something you know by
this functions okay so so you know these type hints are like formula specification in some sense
okay so with this I think we have covered enough regarding you know the types in Python system
and please take your time to reflect on this idea these are very important idea
and there are very subtle differences with you know most many of you may get confused if you
you know don't pay attention to these things so please pay attention to you know these things and go
back to through this script to family to familiarize yourself with these no ideas so I will see you
in the next video till then goodbye
