Hello and welcome back to the Python Core and Applied Concept.
We are going to start Model 2 today and the main content of Model 2 will be the basic
building blocks of Python programming language which are now variable data types expression.
So let us now begin the discussion by moving to the slides.
So this is our slide, title slide which says that now we are going to discuss today the
building blocks, variables, data types and expressions in Python.
So before we start the discussion of the basic building blocks of Python, let me quickly
recap what we discussed so far.
So we have already discussed the difference between syntax and semantics for programming
language in detail in the last module.
We understood that for defining programming language, you need to clearly define what
all you can write in that programming language or what can be accepted as a valid program
in the programming language.
And these things are described using the syntax of programming language, sometimes we
call syntax is what describe this notion of what is a valid or what is an invalid structurally
valid or invalid program in a programming language.
And the meaning of those structurally valid program is what we refer to as normally semantics.
So the only way to describe semantics or the most common way in which the programming
language designers would want to describe the semantics of a programming language is in
English, right?
And we describe the meaning of a program by describing what will be the effect of executing
that program on the state of machine that is running that program, okay?
And if you recall, we also discussed the complexity involved in this process of describing
the meaning or semantics of a programming language because if you want to know the true
or semantics, then you have to describe the effect of execution of that program on the
exact machine, which we also refer to as concrete machine, right?
This is very complex.
And you know, if you want to reason at that level, it becomes very difficult to write and
reason any, let's say, you know, non-trivial and useful program.
So that's why we move to the concept of high level programming languages, right?
I mean, we say that high level programming languages help us abstract out these concrete
machine details by assuming some abstract machine where, you know, the number of details
are not so high.
I mean, you don't every time need to think in terms of what's changing inside the machine
rather than that.
You can think in terms of, you know, abstract concepts like what we are going to discuss
today, variables and expressions and how these, you know, abstract concepts of, you know,
variable and expression can help us figure out, you know, the change of the state of our
abstract machine that we want to know work with.
So underlying every high level programming language, there is an abstract machine which
is far more simpler than our concrete machine, which we will actually run the program.
But I mean, reasoning on top of the abstract machine is sufficient for, you know, ensuring
that your program behaves exactly the same way as you want when it's, you know, executed
even on the non-trivial machine or concrete machine, okay?
So the programming language, a compiler and interpreted take care of all these, you know,
abstraction.
I mean, we don't need to, you know, we don't need to actually care about how these things
are getting executed inside the machine, but if you can, you know, reason about these
things at the subtracting machine level, then it should be enough, okay?
And we also, if you remember, emphasize, you know, the evolving role of a programmer,
you know, from, you know, being a code created to a code validator, now as moving forward
since we are using, you know, LLM and other kind of agents, very, you know, aggressively
in code development, you know, for good reasons.
So we need to somehow ensure, you know, we are, you know, almost never writing our code
from the various scratch.
So no, there is no pressing need to ensure that whatever code we get generated using these
LLM or any agent, we have a better understanding of that code.
No, in the sense that we, we can be sure that the code actually does what we intended it
to do, right?
Because the only, you know, assurance that we have right now is that we gave a natural
language prompt with somehow described our intent of computation.
And these LLMs may have produced, you know, the correct or a line code which achieves
those intences, but there is no guarantee, most of the time, these LLM has its needs.
And they know they create, you know, any agent can create, you know, wrong result.
So we should be able to understand or at least validate once we get the code, whether
the code is doing exactly the same thing that we wanted it to do, okay?
So that, that's one of the reason why we have designed this course, not keeping in mind
that we will focus most of the time on semantics and try to understand the meaning of the
program, you know, better so that we are in a position whenever we get the code, we can,
you know, assure ourselves that the code is actually aligned with our implementation, okay?
So with this, you know, I think we can go ahead with our discussion of today's topic,
which is mostly about the very basic building blocks in Python, which are, you know, like
the concepts of what is variable, what is expression, you know, and what is the meaning
of, you know, these variables and expression and some simple statement in Python programming
language.
So this is roughly our plan, we will start with variable and identifier, then we will
see that there is something, you know, called keywords, which is available in most of the
programming languages, we then move to some of the, you know, typing, you know, feature
or, you know, typing facility that is available in site, Python programming languages,
like language, like, you know, typing, strong typing and, you know, static typing.
So let's start with the discussion, you know, on variables, okay?
So now remember, I mean, in any, you know, imperative programming language, which is mostly
derived from the Turing machine concept and Turing machine and nothing but, you know,
machine with some control unit with, you know, infinite memory type, right?
So all of these imperative programming paradigm, primarily, you know, rely on, you know,
giving computer a sequence of commands, which can change its state.
Now, when we say change it, state means change, it's no state of the memory, okay?
And in fact, this is not only a way in which we can get any, you know, meaningful computation
done by these imperative programming languages.
So underlying in theory is that, you know, we try to design or we try to, you know, come
up with a sequence of instruction, which can do appropriate changes in the state of memory.
And if we are able to observe these changes, so observing these changes is nothing but, you
know, what we call as computation, okay?
So, you know, by ensuring that the machine changes its state in a particular way.
And by observing this, you know, change of state of the machine, we can observe the,
you know, output of the computation that we want to, you know, perform, okay?
Because I mean, most of the time we are making in the process of how we compute something
using pen and paper, right? So when you write some, when you take a task of computing,
let's say some function using pen and paper, what you start always is with some input, right?
You, you start with the input and then in between you compute lots of intermediate results
and final results is what you know, want to maybe compute.
So you store all these intermediate results, you know, by writing them on pen and paper.
So the idea in any imperative programming language is that,
you know, instead of this pen and paper, now can we use the memory of these machines to,
you know, or, you know, do the same kind of navigation inside this machine, right?
Rather than writing on pen and paper, can we start with some, you know, variable,
which will have these initial values, you know, which are input to our function?
And then we calculate all these intermediate values, which are necessary for, let's say,
calculating the complex function that we finally want to compute.
And can we keep temporarily stored them in some other valuable or, you know,
intermediate valuable and finally come to the conclusion where program returns us,
the final complex value, okay?
So this is the idea of an imperative programming language that we,
and, you know, all that we can do is, you know, design these sequence of instructions in
appropriate way so that they do these, you know, changes of state of machine,
so that the final result reflects the computation that we want to achieve, okay?
Now, the reality is that to do all these, I mean, you have to use all the,
if you want to be, you know, purest, you have to talk in terms of the language of hardware, okay?
Because data is stored in memory locations, you know, each of which has some numeric,
you know, address, you know, which may, you know, look something like,
something like this, right?
So these are, you know, addresses of memory, you know, and CPU operates on data in the
registers. So if you really want to communicate with this machine directly, let's say,
you have to talk in terms of these kind of, you know, addresses and then, you know,
interact with CPU instructions, which are, which CPU can understand, okay?
But all of this becomes very, you know, challenging and that's why we need, you know,
this idea of variable, okay? So variable, you know, takes us from memory address to meaningful names,
okay? So we somehow want ourself to be free from, you know, manipulating, you know,
addresses and direct CPU instruction and work at a high level. So variable, you know, in that
sense, you know, provides us this, you know, fast level of, or layer of abstraction, where,
what we want to say is that I don't want to care where this variable is getting stored in
site memory, but I would like to call it by some name, which is, that's a convenient for, you know,
some meaningful name, which I can remember throughout the development of this program.
So that's how I mean these variables are very important in any programming languages.
So you can assume, or you can, you know, see variable at the first layer of abstraction,
which makes our life very easy, you know, instead of, you know, referring to this exact memory
location, we would refer to the same location using these variable names, which are far more,
you know, easy for us to remember and work with. So, we need an abstraction, you know,
this is our problem and the solution is, we can get this communication done very effectively,
if we have variable names, which are, you know, meaningful in nature, so that, you know,
we can recall what is the purpose of each variable. And then, in the process of computation,
we would like to come up with a program statement, which can appropriately change the value of this,
you know, variables to reflect what we want to finally can create. Okay, so what is a variable then?
A variable is a, you know, named alias or labeled for a memory location, okay? So you can,
you know, assume for all, you know, practically, in that variable, like sticky notes, okay,
with a name, okay, you can write, you know, name on that and stick into boxes and boxes and
nothing, but, you know, these memory locations that contain values. So, although, finally,
the values are being, you know, stored in memory location, you are referring to those,
you know, values by using these variable names, okay? So this allows us to think in terms of
problem domain and not the hardware domain, okay? Because if we are freed from the complexities of,
with this hardware domain, then we can focus more on the problem and how to solve that problem,
the solution, that problem. So that's why, you know, these variables, you know, provide a very,
you know, first layer of abstraction, which is not always essentially in any high-level programming
language. Okay, so now, you know, it's time to move into the Jupyter Notebook and we will try to
explore this, you know, by doing some hands-on exploration around variable. We will, you know,
try to explore how to define this or, I mean, how, what is the syntax or the semantics of this
variable? Okay, so whenever we come across any new concept in the programming language, we will also
always want to try to ask the question. I mean, if I want to define this concept of variable
properly, I need to define two things. First one is, you know, syntax. How can I write variables
properly? Let's say instruction involving variables properly inside the programming language.
And the next question should be, so what is the meaning of a variable? You know, so meaning of a
variable can only be understood in, you know, in the context of how a variable, how changing a variable
can change this state of, you know, machine. So that's what is the semantics of a variable.
So, so let me now move on to Jupyter Notebook, which we will be using as a default ID for this course
and try to explain, you know, some of this feature, you know, inside the Jupyter Notebook.
So, let us try to go to that screen first and see whether everything works fine. So,
okay, so this is our Jupyter Notebook. I hope, yeah, so this is visible now. So, we can see,
this is Jupyter Notebook. So, since this is, you know, first time we are coming to Jupyter Notebook.
So, this as I, you know, discuss in the very first, you know, module, this is one of the popular
IDE that many people use and this is one of my favorite because, you know, you can see there,
inside Jupyter Notebook, you can write code blocks. So, these are, you know, called code blocks.
I mean, you can see when I click on, you know, let me click on this, when I, you know, click on
this particular code block, this, this, this, this was as code, right? So, so there are two types of,
you know, blocks normally which people use very frequently inside this Jupyter Notebook,
one is called code block and another one is model. So, for example, you know, this second block,
when I click, you see, I mean, here it changes to model down, you know, instead of code block,
now it says a small dot. So, this is now for writing comments or any descriptions. So,
for example, when I was preparing this tutorial, I use both of these features to,
nicely, you know, describe what we are discussing at a particular point of time inside the Jupyter
Notebook. So, this is a very handy, you know, IDE. If you want to both develop your code and also
describe it properly, maybe, you know, this is one of the best, you know, interface available.
So, please feel free to explore other ideas, but for this course, we will be working precisely
with, you know, these Jupyter Notebooks. So, you can see, I can run these code blocks.
Okay. So, shortcut is you, you know, if you are on a Mac, you can simultaneously,
you know, press shift return to just run this thing. Okay. And this cell runs. When you come to the
second, you know, you know, thing, this is no markdown. If you double click on this, you see,
you see the markdown, no, no, notations here. Okay. So, when we run it, we get things in
proper format, okay. So, so let's start with the variable first, okay. So, with the discussion
of variable, so what do we want to discuss here? So, we want to, you know, define the syntax first,
right? This is what we talk right now. To define a variable, you know, we first want to define
the syntax of a variable. So, syntax means, I mean, a rule which tells us how to write down or
declare a variable properly. Okay. So, to define a, so I, as we, you know, discuss variables are
nothing but, you know, labels or aliases that we, you know, give us name to these memory locations,
which are, you know, which may be either register or, you know, main memory. So, how to give them,
can we give write anything as name or there is some restriction on giving, you know, meaningful name?
Okay. So, so there are some restrictions. You can read the detail again in the reference manual,
but just to, you know, summarize, no, your variable name can start with letter or underscore,
and then follow with letters, you know, digit or underscore. Okay. So, so you, you see one thing that,
the digit cannot, you know, appear in the very beginning, you know, of the, any variable name.
Okay. So, this is no one restriction that Python developer have, you know, kept while defining variable
names, you should follow this. And it's case sensitive, you know, if you write something in
lower case and some other variable name in upper case, they will be considered as different,
not the same. So, can, so let me write down, you know, some of, you know, let's say, you know,
some, you know, valid variable name on some, maybe invalid variable name to, you know,
see it in no accent, whether, you know, Python accept it. So, so this is the cell, which can accept
some code. So, let me, you know, declare some variable name, like, you know, we can talk about
this course itself, you know, so what is the, you know, so I can use both, you know, letter and
underscore, right? So, for example, you know, our course, you know, name for our course is
Python, core and applied concepts, right? So, what, what I have to just now done is that,
I declared a variable, can you see my cursor? Yeah, I, I, you know, declared a variable, which is,
you know, course name, okay? And this is valid, where, you know, variable name, why? Because it
follows the syntax, okay? Because it, you know, it has, you know, lower or upper case letters,
you know, followed by some, you know, underscore, and then again, sequence of letters. And so,
you know, this is, and then I assigned a string to this, you know, a variable called course name,
okay? So, so this is, you know, what, so if you run this, I mean, you can see whether Python
accept it or not. So, it, so see, when I, you know, run this block, Python accepts, you know,
this variable name as a valid variable name, and this assignment also has a valid assignment. So,
there is no error that, you know, comes in, okay? Similarly, I mean, we can, you know, define,
so this was one variable which stored string, okay? So, can we define another variable,
which, kind of stored Boolean values? Like, you know, if I want to know the status of let's say,
the course, whether this course has started or not, okay? So, we know that the course has started,
right? So, that's why I'm here putting the value true. The true and false are two possible Boolean
values inside Python, which you can use, you know, in different ways. We will see when we come
to, you know, conditional how these Boolean, you know, data types becomes very useful in deciding
which branch to take, you know, inside your program. So, what, for the time being, I mean,
let's assume that I'm only using this Boolean to, let's say, you know, keep track of the status of
my course, you know, I want to know whether the course has started or not. Since its course has started,
we put it value, you know, true and try to run it. No, that doesn't mean compiler gives an area,
no, I mean, when we run it, you can see, I mean, it runs perfectly, all right, okay? Now, what about
some other, not type of, so let's say, if I want to talk about a number of students in this course,
which may be no more than 100, but let's say, say that the number number of students is equal to,
maybe, let's say, put a number here 100. This is another variable, which is trying to store
not data of type integer, right? So, if we try to run this, what do you guess? I mean, will Python accept
this? Okay, so let's try to, and it can see what's the answer. So, if we run it, can you see,
there is a error, right? Okay, so number of students, so syntax error, I cannot assign expression here,
maybe you mean equal to equal to instead of this. So, the problem here, no, so I mean, so this is a
syntax error, and the main reason is that, you know, while forming the name, okay, so while forming the
name of this variable, I have violated the, you know, rule of syntax, which is that you can either
use a no letter or underscore, but I have to do this hyphen, okay? So, this is the main reason,
and if we, you know, get rid of this, let's say, instead of this, if I write number of students,
if you get rid of that, and if we try to put underscore here, and if we run, you see, there is no
error, right? So, I mean, if one has to be, you know, careful, I mean, you cannot define
these variables in any way, okay? So, you can only use those things, which are allowed by the syntax
of the programming language, but fortunately, since these syntax are very formal, you know,
compiler can take care of, you know, these violations and can alert you, you know, at the compile
time itself, so you don't, you know, carry forward this kind of errors. So, what can we, you know,
another, you know, invalid name, I mean, if you, so if we want to see, what is the, so is the course
in its second term, or it's in first term, right now. So, the course, but we are doing right now,
is certainly, you know, in the first term, so I would like to say that no, second term status is,
you know, not true now, let's say it's false. So, it's false is another, no kind of, so,
the Boolean data type, which we want to store. So, what do you think, I mean, really,
except this one or the compiler will throw some error message.
Okay, so let's run and try to see what compiler does. So, when we run this, again, I mean, there is
a, you know, syntax error. And where, what is wrong here? The, the place, which is complaining in
this place, okay, so do you see the problem? I mean, we started this variable name with
a digit, right? And a digit was not allowed in the very beginning, okay? So, this is also not,
you know, accepted syntax for a variable name, okay? So, we should get rid of, you know,
this kind of wrong variable name because they are not allowed by the syntax. So, this is also
invalid, okay? So, so, so, no, so, no, let's comment it. So, the reason why this is not valid,
this is because number can't appear in the beginning, okay? So, what was the reason for the
earlier one when we had hyphen here? Because, you know, hypens are not allowed at all.
So, so, what about, I mean, if, if you write, you know, something like this. So, how many classes
are let's say there? So, so, is there a, you know, one class or two class in this particular,
let's say, offering of the course? So, if I want to say there is only one class, you know,
number of classes, if I want to represent this class. And, you know, I want to say that,
you know, there is only one class. So, I want a variable to store this, you know, number of classes.
So, in this case, let's say we have only one class going on right now. So, if you write one,
do you think this is a, you know, valid variable declaration and assignment inside Python?
And there's no particular case. I mean, I haven't violated any, right? I mean, we have only
used lowercase letters. So, it should be an acceptable, you know, variable name, my Python,
and it should, you know, accept this value one, right? So, but let us run and see what Python
says about this. Okay? So, so it says it's an invalid syntax. Okay? So, you cannot assign this
so value one to a class. So, so the reason here is not, you know, because we are violating the,
you know, syntax for variable name is because this class, no, identifier is reserved as a keyword.
Okay? So, Python, although it allows you a lot of freedom in defining the variable name,
according to, you know, the way you want, you know, which reflects maybe the meaning of,
or the intention of that variable in your program. But there are some identifiers or some names,
which Python results for its own use. Okay? So, because I mean, compiler need these, you know,
keywords for certain purposes. Okay? So, these keywords have some no reserved meaning. So,
that's why you have in Python results then. Okay? So, this class is one such keyword, which is
not available to you or any programmer to declare it as a, you know, normal variable and assigns
some value. Okay? So, these, this is, you know, reserved as keywords. And that's why Python,
you know, did not allow you to describe or define a variable with this particular keyword.
So, so now, I mean, this, you know, brings us naturally to our, you know, next topic, which is,
you know, keywords. So, what is keywords? So, keywords are actually reserved in Python. So,
for example, I mean, if you, you know, one, so, want to define different types of, you know,
sentences in our statement in your programming language, then you would need these keywords.
I mean, these keywords help you combine things properly to make a proper statement, which can be
executed inside Python. So, we need a lot of no such reserved keywords. So, that's why Python has
reserved some of these. And it says that you cannot be, you cannot use these keywords inside your
program as a variable. So, what are some keywords? Like, if while deaf, class, lambda, and true
faults. Okay? So, these, these have predefined semantics in the abstract machine. Like, if I say,
let's say, deaf, you know, I somehow hint the compiler of Python that I'm going to define a function.
Okay? Similarly, if I, you know, use this class keyword, I, you know, give a hint to the compiler
that I'm going to define a class inside and class as a particular meaning and already existing
in programming languages. So, we want compiler to know something using these, you know, keywords.
If you are, whether we are defining a function or we are defining a loop or, you know, we are
defining a, you know, if else conditional. So, for all of this, we need these, you know,
predefined semantics for, you know, these keywords. And that's why I mean, they're not available
for use inside a program as a variable name. Okay? So, you cannot use them as variable name.
So, you know, coming next, so what are some keywords in? So, these are, of course, some of the
keywords, but can we, you know, print all possible, you know, keywords inside Python? So, to do,
to do that. So, let me write a few line of code to show you some of the, you know,
available keywords. So, like, but before doing that, we have to, you know, import this, you know,
keyword, module inside Python, which will help us, you know, print all the keywords. So,
this is how we import some module, like, I mean, this is one of one file that we have started,
right? So, I have already imported it here. So, I may not need to import it there, but I mean,
since this is one file, so there are multiple, you know, models inside Python,
available, which you can use. So, there are many, you know, many functions, you know,
signature and, you know, implementation available in the Python standard library. And if you want to
use or utilize some of them, you know, without, again, you know, defining them, then you can just
import those modules. So, this is how we import a module inside Python. We say, you know, import
the module keyword, which we may have many other things, but I'm, you know, importing it for,
you know, particular purpose here. So, this is the way we work inside Python. We import something,
which is already existing. And then, no, maybe, we can go and use it. So, what, in this case, I,
want to, you know, print some of the, let's say keywords. So, from the, you know, keyword
model, I'm trying to, you know, print this keyword list, okay? So, that's why this, you know,
keyword list. And maybe, you know, I want to just say, let's say, not 10 keywords. So, so,
don't worry about it. You know, this exact syntax, if you don't understand it now, because these,
these, you know, colon and, you know, these square brackets, you know, represents lists. So,
we will, you know, talk about it when we go to list. But for now, I mean, what I'm trying to say,
is I'm just trying to print some of the, you know, available keywords inside Python, okay? So,
maybe just 10 or, or let's say, you know, 20 keywords, you know, if it is available inside Python,
let's, you know, print it. There may be more, okay? But let's say, you know, show me, and this is
just to show, let's say, the first 20, okay? So, what we're doing is we are trying to, you know,
ask, you know, Python to show us, maybe the first 20 keywords.
So, when we, you know, execute it, let's see, you know, what are the possible to see? So,
these are the, you know, first 20 keywords that is now available inside Python, like false,
none, true, and as assert, okay? So, some of them, I mean, there are more, you can, you know,
print maybe, you know, 30, the first 30 keywords, and then you see what happens. I mean, when we
print first 30, Python actually prints first 30. So, you know, in total, I remember Python has
35, you know, keywords. So, I mean, if you print 35, it will, you know, print 35, what, if I print 36,
necessarily prints, you know, 35 because, no, it has only 35, so it will print, you know, 35 keywords.
Okay, so, so this is all about keywords. So, keyword has predefined semantics in the abstract
machine that Python assumes, and it cannot be used as a variable name. So, these are the two things
that we need to somehow keep in mind when working with Python. Okay, so now, let's move to the next
topic, which is the basic, you know, act of assignment. So, so we have already seen an assignment,
right? We have seen multiple assignments that we have declared variable, and we have also,
we have not only declared variable, but also assigned some values to these variables, like,
like this one assigned a string value to course name, and this one assigned, you know,
this Boolean value to this variable, this, you know, started, and then we have number of students,
and 100, which is an integer, which has been assigned to, you know, these variables. So,
we have already seen some assignment. Okay, so, let me, you know, come here and show you some,
you know, more examples of, you know, basic assignment. So, when, when we assign something like
this, okay, so let's say, let me, you know, say, let's say, if I assign to this x or value 10,
so what are we doing? Okay, so we are essentially creating a label, okay, x, and pointing it to the
integer object 10, okay. So, in Python, you know, everything is, you know, object. So, this 10
is an integer object, you know, object of, you know, type integer, and so what, this statement does,
is it assigns a label, you know, x to this, you know, level x, pointing to this integer object 10,
okay. So, when you print, you know, let's say, when, whenever we print, let's say, this x,
what do we get? So, let us print this x and see what, what do we get? We get the value 10,
right? Now, it turns out that, you know, we can assign or we can create multiple level for the same
object, okay. For instance, I mean, in this case, you see, I mean, we have assigned x as a label
to this 10, but we can also say in the, you know, immediately next statement that we want to assign
another level, let's say, y to the same, you know, object that x was pointing to, okay.
If we write this, what we are saying is, now, y will also point to 10. This is what we mean,
I mean, we can create multiple levels for the same object, okay. So, to, again, check, I mean,
if you want to print, no, let's say, print, and this is how we print inside Python, we write
this print command, and then, let's say, value of, so what we are trying to print here is value of,
let's say, y, and then we have to pass this variable y and see what is the final outcome, okay.
So, original value, so this print, so when I run this, this print gets executed, so you get a
10 value here, and for the y, you know, we are printing again the value of y, which is here,
again, 10, okay. So, this is very, you know, interesting to see that, you know, we have assigned two
different levels to the same object, you know, of integer type, you know, 10. Now, what about,
so we know that these variables provide assigned abstraction, okay, but can we, you know, inspect
the abstraction, you know, and get to know, using, you know, these variables name that, what
objects these variables name are referring to, okay. So, these objects are certainly, you know,
some, you know, concrete data types, I mean, to which these variables are referring to,
but is there a way to, you know, figure out or inspect this abstraction? So, the ID function,
you can use us, the built-in ID function to get the unique identity of these objects,
which is essentially, you know, stored in memory addresses, you know, in the current running process.
So, ID can tell us about, you know, if you use ID on this variable, this ID function,
then we can actually figure out these unique IDs for these objects that these variables point to.
Now, this can be used to prove that two variables are referencing to the same object,
but you cannot use this ID to look up or manipulate data directly, okay. So, these are not exactly,
like, you know, pointers. So, many people who are coming from C, C++, background,
who are familiar with pointer, they may get a little confused and may, you know,
assume that, you know, these, you know, object references are nothing but pointer, but they're
not pointer. Actually, there is a subtle difference, which we'll, you know, say in some time.
But, you know, let's try to first, you know, see whether we can use this ID function to figure out
what is the, you know, ID of, let's say, X and Y that we have. Right now, we know that X and Y
point to the same variable, but can we confirm it? So, if we, let's say, print, let's say, first,
what I want to do is I want to print the ID of the object X, okay. So, ID of the object X,
we want to print. So, what we are writing here is ID of X, okay. And then, let's print a copy
this. And again, try to print the ID of object Y. And see whether we get same ID or different
IDs here. So, what do you see? I mean, if we print both of these, you know, statement,
then this is what we get, right? So, we get ID of object X as this one and ID of object Y as this
one. So, both, no, the object, both objects are same ID. It means, I mean, these X and Y are
referring to the same object, no, wherever it lies in the memories, it's actually referring to
the same object, okay. So, similarly, we can also use a function, another function called type
function to tell us the semantic type of the object, okay. So, this ID, you know, help us,
so since variables are abstraction, right? I mean, just by looking at the variable name, you cannot
say which object it is referring to or what is the type of the object that it is referring to.
Okay. So, for getting those, you know, details, we are using these ID and type functions.
The type function can tell you what is the type of data that is, you know, stored in this particular
variable. For example, again, I mean, using for the, you know, two variables that we have defined
above, if you want to know the type, what we can say is, you know, print for us, let's say,
the type of X, and what we write after this is
type of X, okay. And similarly, I mean, we let us copy this and try to use the same
or getting the type of Y, we change this to Y and type of Y. So, since they are, no,
my point in the same object, the type should be same and in this case, what is the type, type for
X and Y, both should be integer, right? So, let us print it. So, see, this type of X is no int and
type of Y is also int, okay. So, this is how we can actually inspect this abstraction and try to
figure out the exact detail of what this abstract variable, you know, is referring to and what is
the type of the object that it is referring to, okay. So, now, let's move on to the, you know,
next important thing, which would demonstrate the ability to rewind the same variable name to some
other object, okay. So, here, I mean, things go a little subtle and one should be very careful,
not to confuse, you know, these variable names and, you know, this early bending as, you know,
pointer, no, because I mean, that can be very confusing. So, let us, I know, try to just, you know,
see with some example what I want to, you know, if I say so X and Y are pointing, are not to
actually point it to the same memory location. So, if you are familiar with pointer, I mean,
this may be, you know, a place where you may get confused that X and Y are actually pointed to
the same memory location, no. So, X and Y point to the same object, but they are not, you know,
pointed to the same memory location, okay. In Python, a variable is not a memory container,
but this is important to understand. It's a name tag or a reference that points to an object
in the memory and not to a memory location. So, this is very, very important, especially if you
are working with immutable data types like, you know, integer, string or, you know, double,
then this is a great no point of confusion for, you know, many of the big newcomers. So,
to highlight this, let me now work out some example and then it will be clear. For example,
in the beginning, as you remember, I mean, we instantiated both X and Y with a value 10, right?
And that's why, that's how, you know, you know, that they point to the same object. But what?
If at this particular point, we change the value of Y to, let's say, 20, okay. And let's say,
we change the value of Y to the point of Y to 20. And then if we want to, no print, what is the,
no, current? After let's say, executing this instruction that, no, we assign Y to 22, Y,
if we want to see what's the value inside, let's say, the variable X. So, what's the, let's say,
current value? Okay, so what is the current value of, say, X at this particular moment? Okay,
so let me. So, do you think that changing Y will change X? No, no, if you consider them as
pointer, then certainly yes, right? Because both point to the same memory location. So, no matter
whether you change the value there, Y or Y or X, the change value should be reflected in both the
cases, right? So, I mean, if they are actually pointer, then the current value of X should also
change, right? But if you let's say, no print this, what do you get? You get the current value of
X is 10, but you have assigned a value 20 to Y, okay? So, no, the current value of X has is same
as the original value of X, right? Which was also the value of Y. So, these are not actually
pointer, right? So, this is a very, you know, a small example to show that changing Y does not change
X. And that's how, I mean, these are not exactly, you know, memory variables are not memory
container, okay? So, they're the point to the same object. So, this is how, I mean, so Python's,
you know, memory management and type system, take care of all of this for you. So, you don't need
to worry, but I mean, you need to keep with this distinction clearly in mind that when you change
the, so even if you assign, you know, Y to X, let's say here, and later on change the value of Y,
you are not changing the value of X. Similarly, let me again change the value of X to know some other
value, okay? So, 30, let's say. So, again, I mean, you can expect that the value of, you know, Y
by changing this. So, since this is changing the value of X, and if I want to print now the current
value of Y, what do you expect here, okay? So, based on our last discussion, what we expect here
is that no value of Y should not change, right? The value of Y should be 20. If we run this code,
this is what, you know, we get, which ensures that our understanding is now correct. We are not
confusing, you know, these variable names as pointer in C, okay? To be more clear, I mean, if you
want, you can also print the ID, okay? So, now, you see, I mean, Y and X are actually
pointing to different objects, okay? So, since they are pointing to different objects, you know,
if I just prove the ID of those objects, I should get, you know, different results, right? So,
we can confirm this again. So, by just printing now, maybe the ID, so let's, you know, print plus the
ID of object X. Let me print the ID of object X, and let's repeat the same instruction.
Okay, for variable Y, let's change X to Y here, and also here Y, and try to see. So, what do you
expect? I mean, now that we have assigned 20 to Y and 32X, if you print ID, what do you expect?
Do you get the same result or different things? So, in this case, you can see that we get
different, right? That X and Y are now pointing to two different objects, okay? And the ID for those
different objects are, you know, clearly, you know, distinct here, right? This is what we can figure out.
So, to summarize, you know, what we saw, you know, in this short video is that Python
hides the complexity of direct memory manipulation, okay? And pointers behind a, you know, safe,
high-level abstraction called object references, okay? So, these are called, no, object references. So,
variable are referencing two objects, not to memory location. This makes the language easier,
and you know, is it learned and used while being less prone to common memory management error?
Otherwise, you have to do everything on your own. I mean, if you are given, they can see, I mean,
you can manage your memory very efficiently, but then that is also, you know, a major cause of,
you know, memory errors and no other kind of error. So, Python tries to hide all these details,
you know, from you, and it still allows you enough freedom to work with it and write meaningful
programs, okay? So, this is all for today. So, thank you for watching this video. I will meet you
in the next video. Till then, goodbye. Thank you.
