So, the first lecture is going to be about sets you know. So, what is a set? Let us see
that. So, a set is a collection of elements. So, there are some elements and it is a collection
of things. The important thing is it is unordered. So, what do you mean by unordered? So, let
us take a set. So, let A be the set 1, 2, 4. It is like 4 numbers. I put them in a set
together, it becomes a set and this is the notation for a set. You have 2 I mean curly
brackets and yeah. So, if I write these numbers in another order for example, 1, 4, 2 that
is also the same set. It does not become a different set. So, a set is an unordered collection.
There is no ordering inside the set. So, the things inside the set, the inside the curly
brackets are called the elements of the set. So, 1 is an element of the set and the way
you write down mathematically is 1 belongs to the set A. Similarly, 4 also belongs to
the set A. Similarly, 2 also belongs to the set A. Now, how do you say something does
not belong to the set? You say we just yeah we use that symbol with yeah this symbol is
called does not belong to yeah. So, given sets yeah so there are some very natural sets
that you might have encountered yeah. So, what are the natural sets that you have encountered?
For example, yeah natural numbers is the first set that you always encounter yeah. It is
1, 2, 3 and so on yeah. So, the previous set A is a finite set yeah. It consists of 3 elements
yeah but this set of natural numbers is a infinite set. You cannot assign a I mean size
to it. It is a infinite set. So, this is a infinite set yeah while this set A is a finite
set. So, yeah there are several other sets. For example, there is a set of integers which
is denoted by set yeah which can which is also includes the like negative numbers. So,
it is let us say minus 2, minus 1, 0, 1, 2, 3 and so on yeah. So, yeah there are real numbers,
there are complex numbers you are familiar with all these things. So, given sets so one thing
that you notice between natural numbers and integers is then set of natural numbers is
contained inside the set of integers. The set of natural numbers is contained in the set of integers.
So, how do you expect that mathematically? You say that set of natural numbers is a subset of
integers. So, this is the simple that you use to say that one set is contained in the other set.
What does that mean? It means that it means that what does this mean? It means that take
any elements in natural numbers, it also belongs to the set z yeah. That means for every A belonging
to the natural numbers yeah, A also belongs to the integers. That is what belongs means yeah.
Every integer in the smaller set is also contained in the bigger set okay. So, yeah so is this true?
Is natural numbers, is integers contained in the natural numbers? No. Why? Because if you take the
element minus 1, it is contained in the integers but it is not contained in the natural numbers yeah.
So, this is not true yeah. So, when you when the set N is not a subset of the set z yeah,
the way to express this mathematically is to use the sub set notation and make a cross just like
we did with the belongs to relation yeah. So, this is the belongs to relation and this is the
subset notation yeah. So, yeah so you have yeah so we have gone through what a subset is and what
the belongs to relation is. If a set is finite yeah, so you the sets like natural numbers,
integers and all are infinite yeah. For finite sets yeah, finite sets have cardinality yeah.
So, what do you mean by cardinality? So, given a set for example the set A we saw. So, A is the set
1, 2 and 4 yeah. The cardinality of the set is denoted by mode A. You put 2 vertical lines in
left and right side of A and it is just the number of elements in A yeah. So, the cardinality of the
set is just the number of elements in A yeah. So, yeah so let us say you have the set. So,
let us say B is the set yeah 1, 3, 6 yeah 9 up to up to let us say 3 times n yeah. So,
n is some number and let us say B is the set yeah. So, what is the cardinality of B yeah. So,
how many elements are there in B yeah. So, yeah so if you look at it. So, there is yeah 3 is there,
6 is there. So, let us substitute n is equal to 1 yeah. If I substitute n equal to 1 I get only
the set 3 yeah. So, in some sense yeah I mean if n equal to 1 the set is of size 1 right. So,
if n equal to so I think I should start with 0 yeah. So, if n equal to 0 it is set is of size
1 n is equal to 1 the set is of size 2 yeah. So, the size of the set is nothing but n plus 1 yeah.
The cardinality of the set is the set of elements in the I mean in the set yeah okay. So, yeah so
we have understood yeah subsets cardinality and belongs to yeah. So, yeah so there are 2 special
sets yeah corresponding to any set. So, you have the set A yeah A is again 1 2 4 yeah. There is a
special subset of A yeah actually there is a special subset which is a subset of all sets yeah.
So, there is what is called the empty set yeah. Empty set is a set with no elements at all. It
does not have any elements yeah and by definition empty set is a subset of any set yeah. So,
empty set is denoted by the symbol this symbol yeah and for any set for any set let us say C yeah
empty set is a subset of C yeah. So, empty set is a set which is a subset of any set yeah because
it contains no elements. So, it has to be a subset of any set yeah. So, yeah so that is the empty
set. The second important set that we need to look at is what is called the power set yeah. So,
the power set is denoted by P of the set let us say you have the set A and the power set of a set
is denoted by P of A yeah power set of A. This is the set of old subsets of the set A yeah.
So, it is a set it is a set. So, what should I write inside? It is a set of all old subsets yeah.
So, what are all the subset of the set A? There is definitely the empty set yeah. There is
definitely the set A itself yeah. The set A itself is a subset of it yeah. So, it is an important
thing. So, for example, set is a subset of set itself yeah. A set by definition is a subset of
itself yeah. A power set is a set of old subsets. So, it contains the empty set I mean the actual
set itself as well as old subsets of it. So, what are all the subsets of it? The set 1,
the set 2, the set 4 yeah and there are several other sets yeah. So, I will write down. So,
maybe I will just erase the little bit and to make space yeah. So, you have the set 1,
2. You have the set 2, 4. You have the set 1, 4 yeah. So, that is those are all the two
elements subsets yeah and what are the three elements subsets? It is 1, 2, 4 yeah. So,
how we cover old subsets of the set A yeah. So, we have covered all the zero size subset
of set A which is only the empty set yeah. So, this set has a cardinality 0. These sets
have cardinality 1 each right. These sets have cardinality 2 each and this is a cardinality 3.
So, any subset of a set has cardinality less than or equal to the cardinality of a set yeah. So,
the cardinality of a subset of A has to be 0, 1, 2 or 3 and we have looked at all the possibilities
yeah. So, if you look at it if you add them up yeah how many sets are there? So, we have 3 plus
3, 6 plus 2, 8 yeah. So, the power set of A yeah has size 8 yeah. More generally yeah suppose if
you take the set to be 1 to n. So, let us take the set A to be 1, 2, 3 up to n yeah. So, the
cardinality of A is 2 raise to n sorry the cardinality of A is n yeah and what is the
cardinality of power set of a yeah. So, each element can be there or not yeah so, this
element can be there or not there are 2 possibilities, this element can be there or not there are
2 possibilities, this element can be there or not there are 2 possibilities. So, there
2 into 2 into 2 n times. So, the power set of A has size 2 raise to n. The power set
has always size 2 raise to n. So, we have discussed what the power set is. So, let us
come to what is called operation zone sets. So, suppose you are given different sets.
What can you do with it? So, let us say you have one set. Let us say you have the set
1, 3, 5, 6, 7 and you have another set B which is 2, 3, 4, 6, 8. So, you have 2 sets. So,
both have the same cardinality. Both have cardinality equal to 5. So, one thing you
can do is you can take A union B. So, union is a operation which takes 2 sets and gives you a
bigger set. So, what is the set A union B? It is a set of all elements in A and B together. So,
what are those elements? 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8. So, all the elements in A and B put
together is called the union of the sets. So, this is called the union and so, similarly,
there is what is called the intersection. So, the intersection of 2 sets, this is called
the intersection. This is the set of all elements that are common in A and B. So,
what are the set of elements that are common in A and B? It is 3, it is 6. So, 3 is common,
4 is not common, 6 is common. So, there is only 2 elements that are in common. So, given 2 sets,
you can take the union which is set of all elements together or the intersection which
is the set of common elements. So, one way to understand these operations is in terms of
a picture and this picture is called the Venn diagram. So, if you take the set A,
I can represent it by a circle like this. All the elements inside the circle represents the
set A. Similarly, I can represent the set B by another circle. All the area inside the B
belongs to a set B. Now, A intersection B is nothing but so, first A union B. So,
what is A union B? Basically, this whole area. The whole area of A and B together is A union
B. So, this is A union B and what is A intersection B? So, this is A, this is B and this area is
A intersection B. So, this is A intersection B. So, is there some relations between A,
B and this A intersection B and A union B? So, let us look at the cardinality of A union
B. So, if you look at the cardinality of A union B, now in A union B, you have all the
elements of A. So, you can count all the elements of A there. You also have all the elements
of B. So, I can add the elements of B to that count. But there is a problem here. The problem
is the area in this intersection has been counted twice. So, we need to subtract the
intersection from it because that intersection area has been counted twice both in A as well
as B. So, this is an important relation between the cardinality of A union B and the A intersection
B. So, another important fact because of the same is the size of A union B is less than
or equal to size of A plus size of B. Because if there is no intersection, it is just size
of A plus size of B. If there is an intersection, you have to subtract it once. Similarly, if
you look at the size of A intersection B, remember that A intersection B is a subset
of A as well as subset of B. So, this is a subset of A as well as subset of B. So, size
of A intersection B is less than or equal to size of A and size of A intersection B
is less than or equal to size of B. So, A intersection B has size less than size of
A and size of B okay. So yeah, so we understand yeah union and intersection yeah. So there
is another important yeah another important operation which is complement yeah.
To understand complement yeah, so you need another set called a universal set yeah. So
universal set. So typically whichever problem that you work in yeah whichever problem that
you work in there is what is called a universal set which is the set of all elements yeah.
For example let us say I am looking at all the integers from 1 to 10 yeah.
Then the universal set typically denoted by omega is the set of numbers 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 that is a universal set yeah. Now A is a so every set that you consider
like all your sets so universal set has basically all the elements in the problem that you consider
yeah. So any set the sets A and B yeah for example the A and B defined here yeah are
subsets of this universal set yeah and yeah. So given a universal sets and subsets of this
universal sets you can define what is called the complement yeah. What is a complement?
So A complement is a set of all elements in the universal sets that is not there in A yeah.
So what are all the elements in the universal set yeah that is already not there in A. So 1
is there in A so that is not there in A complement. 2 is not there in A but it is there in the
universal set. So 2 is there in the complement and yeah 3 4 is there in the complement yeah.
5 is already there in A 6 is already there in A 7 is already there in A 8 is there in the complement
because it is not there in A and 9 is not there in A and 10 is not there in A yeah.
So yeah the complement is the set of elements which is not there in the set A yeah and you
have to define a complement with respect to a universal set yeah.
So naturally yeah the size of A complement yeah is nothing but the size of omega minus
size of A yeah.
So if you look at size of A it is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 yeah and size of omega is 10 and so size
of A complement is also 5 yeah.
So yeah so that is what the complement is yeah.
So yeah so important thing to consider is a complement always is with respect to some
universal set yeah.
So there should be some universal set in mind before you take complement yeah and how do
you pictorially represent the complement?
So we need to have a universal set which is yeah which is given by this rectangular box
There is a set A, there is a set B yeah and yeah what is A complement?
So A complement is yeah A complement is all the area outside A yeah.
So it is this area all the area outside A is A complement yeah.
So yeah so this is A complement and yeah so what is B complement yeah so B complement
is similarly all the area outside B yeah yeah.
So yeah so let us now think about this what is A complement intersection A what is A complement
intersection A?
So A complement has all the elements outside A, A has A is the set A itself there is no
intersection between them yeah.
So A complement intersection A there are no elements there so it is the empty set yeah
so this is nothing but the empty set.
Similarly A complement union A yeah so A has all the elements inside A, A complement has
all the elements outside A so if you take the union of them you will get the entire
universal set omega yeah.
So yeah so it is good to remember these relations yeah so yeah what else do we have so yeah
if you look at this union and intersection yeah so there is a interesting property between
unions and intersection yeah.
So now let us take 3 sets instead of 2 sets we have 3 sets yeah so you have the set A
to be equal to let us say 1 3 5 yeah and you have the set B which is equal to 2 4 5 yeah
and let us say we have the set C which is equal to 5 6 7 yeah let us say we have these
yeah.
Now yeah so now let us consider what is A union B intersection C yeah so you would first
you do B intersection C and then take union with A yeah so the claim is yeah this is equal
to so this is just A union B intersection A union C yeah.
So if you take first intersection and then the union you can do the union first and then
take the intersection yeah that is what this equality means how do you prove this yeah
so let us look at the left hand side and right hand side for this particular example right.
So what is B intersection C here so B intersection C is nothing but there is only one element
in common between B and C which is 5 yeah and what is A union B intersection C yeah
so B intersection C is 5 and if you add it to A you get A itself actually yeah and similarly
if you do A union B yeah you will get yeah so A union B is 1 2 3 4 5 yeah and A union
C is 1 3 5 6 7 yeah and if you take the intersection you will get 5 yeah so this yeah so if you
take the intersection this is nothing but 5 and this is also nothing but 5 yeah yeah
you mean A union B intersection C sorry this is 1 3 5 sorry this is 1 3 5 yeah thanks so both are
1 3 and 5 yeah so this is the important identity yeah that you can take the union if you take the
intersection first and then take the union so what does bracket means is you have to first take the
intersection of B and C and then take that set and take the union with A yeah that is similar to
first taking the union of both sides with A and then doing the intersection yeah so similarly you
can do the other way also which is A intersection B union C is equal to A intersection B union C
A intersection C yeah so yeah how do we like yeah verify this is true you can look at the
picture and verify that is one approach yeah so let us look at let us draw the picture so we have
the let us say yeah this is the universal set yeah and you have A here there is B here and there
is C here this is A this is B and this is C yeah let us try to identify yeah which are the areas
corresponding to the left side of the equation and the right side of the equation yeah so let
me shade the left side with yellow so the left side I will shade with yellow yeah so A union B
intersection C so what is B intersection C it is this area yeah and you have to take union with
A yeah so so B intersection C is this area and that is the A area yeah so it is basically this
area and this area together yeah so that area is A union B intersection C yeah now let us look at
this also so A union B is basically this two together yeah and A union C yeah is these two
together yeah and the intersection of this so A union B is these two together yeah which also
include this whole area A union C is also includes A as well as this area so if you take the intersection
you will get exactly this yellow portion yeah yeah so again let us verify this claim also using
the picture yeah so you have yeah so you have A there is B and there is C A B and C yeah so what
is the set on the left hand side yeah so yeah so you have B union C so B union C is this entire
big area yeah which contains both B and C yeah and A intersection B union C is this area only
yeah so A intersection B union C is that area now let us look at the right hand side yeah so
A intersection B A intersection B is this just to this side yeah and A intersection C is just
this side and you take the union of it you will get exactly this yellow area yeah so that is how
you prove yeah those two identities yeah yeah so now we understand yeah so yeah so some important
identities which relates sets yeah yeah now finally well it is come out come to a important
result yeah which is let us look at what happens when you take A union B yeah and then take the
complement of it yeah what happens when you take A union B and take the complement of it so if you
take the picture it looks like this so you have a set A you have the set B yeah A union B this
entire area the complement of it yeah with respect to the universal set so it will be all the area
outside both the sets it is all the area outside both the sets yeah now yeah so now let us look
at another set which is A complement intersection B complement yeah so let us look at A complement
intersection B complement and let us draw it in the picture so that is A that is B so A complement
is everything outside A and B complement is everything outside B yeah so what is the
intersection of A complement out intersection B complement yeah that is nothing but this area
this area is outside A as well as outside B that is what A complement intersection B
B complement means yeah note that these two are exactly equal yeah so we have the proof
that A union B the whole complement is nothing but A complement intersection B complement yeah
and yeah so similarly if you yeah think about it A intersection B the whole complement is
nothing but A complement union B complement yeah again yeah so you can draw a picture and
convince yourself for example yeah so A intersection B is basically this middle portion the whole
complement is the entire outer area outside it yeah so yeah and this is also equal to
B complement so yeah it yeah it actually is a equality yeah so yeah so what have we seen
in today's lecture let us just recap yeah so yeah we saw what is a set yeah a set is
a collection of unordered elements yeah so yeah a set is denoted by this curly bracket
and there is a belongs to a relation which says that whether an element belongs to a set or not
yeah if it belongs to you yeah use the this simple it does not belong to you use that simple yeah
and yeah you have sets you have familiar with and there is a subset relation yeah what is a subset
relation if one set is contained in the set another set that means all the elements in the
first set also belongs to a second set then it is a subset yeah naturally any set is a subset of
itself yeah so that is a subset relation we also looked at cardinality of a set yeah so what is
the cardinality of a set so cardinality of a set is only defined if it is finite yeah so it is not
the defined for infinite set like integers or anything yeah it is only defined for finite set
it is the number of elements in there is inside the set yeah and we discussed what is empty set
which is a subset of all sets yeah and the power set yeah a set of n elements has 2 raised to n
elements in the power set yeah and we discussed various operations that you can do on sets which
is union intersection complement yeah and finally we also looked at certain relations yeah between
when you do multiple operations together for example A union B intersection B is A union B
intersection A union C and how did we convince ourselves that this equalities are true we just
drew the picture yeah the Venn diagram we drew and we looked at the area and we could convince
ourselves yeah yeah finally this is a very important relation that yeah relates complement
and union and intersection which is A union B the whole complement is A complement intersection
B complement and the second identity as well yeah so that is all for yeah this part of the
lecture yeah thank you.
