Okay, so last 2 videos we looked at sets and then we looked at relations and in this video
we will look at what is called functions.
So what is functions?
Functions are a form of relation itself.
So a function is a relation where every element, suppose you have a relation R, subset of
the cross product of 2 sets.
Suppose that relation has to be called a function, if for every element of the set A, you should
have a unique element B to which it is related.
For every element of A, every element of capital A, it should be related to a unique element
of B. So in a relation, every element of A has to be related to a unique element of B.
So you could have, so this is the set A and this is the set B. So this element might be
related to this element here.
This element might be related to that element there.
This element maybe is again related to this same element here.
So let us say this is A, B, C and this is 0 and 1.
So this is a function because every element of A is related to some element of B and it
is a unique element of B.
So if I have another element D here which is not related to anything in B, it is not
a function because every element of A has to be related to some element of B. But if
this D is related to some, let us say there is a new element 2 here, then it is a function.
But it is also important that there should be unique relation.
So if B is both related to 0 and 1, it is no longer become a function.
B has to be related to 0 only.
So if you have a function which is a subset of A cross B, then it is typically written
in this form.
F is a function from A to B. So B can have more elements.
For example, there could be element 3 sitting here which is not related to anything.
That is fine.
So if F is a function from A to B, then every element of A has to be related to a unique
element of B. So given this function, the set A is called the domain of the function.
The set B is called the co-domain of the function.
If you look at this picture, you will see that there is a set element 3 which is not
related to anything.
So you have this set of elements which is 0, 1, 2, which is related to something in
the domain.
So this subset of B, so this red set is called the range of the function.
The range of the function is a subset of B. It is a subset of the co-domain such that
some element in the domain is mapped to that element and that is called the co-domain of
the function.
So let us see some examples.
F is a function from natural numbers to natural numbers, set of all natural numbers to natural
numbers and one way to define a function is by means of an equation, Fx equal to 3x.
For every x, you multiply by 3 that is the output of the function.
So what is the domain of this function?
Domain is natural numbers.
What is co-domain?
Co-domain is also natural numbers, so output gives a natural number but are all elements
in the co-domain related to something in the domain, not really.
So what is the range?
Range is a subset of natural numbers.
So what is the range?
So range is the set of natural numbers which are divisible by 3.
So it is set of numbers which is 1, 3, so actually it starts with 3 only.
So because 3, 6, 9, 12 and so on.
The co-domain is the entire set of natural numbers but the range is a subset of it only.
So that is one example.
Let us see another example.
So let us say you have a function g and the domain is let us say 1, 2, 3 and the range
is a, b, c.
The domain is 1, 2, 3 and the range is a, b, c and let us say g of 1 is equal to b,
g of 2 is equal to c and g of 3 is equal to a and I have defined the function.
So typically this is defined in a table, when you have functions like this you can write
like this 1, 2, 3, 1 is mapped to b and 2 is mapped to c and 3 is mapped to a.
So that is one way of defining a function, you can write down what is called the table
of the function.
Another way is just like we do it for a relation.
So you have 1, 2 and 3 and you have another a, b and c and 1 is mapped to b, so there
is a line like that and 2 is mapped to c, so there is another line like that and 3 is
mapped to a, so there is another line like that.
So that is the way of drawing a function pictorially.
So there are different types of functions just like we had different types of relations
like reflexive, symmetric, transitive, equivalence and everything.
We have different types of functions, so some type of specific type of functions we need
to know and what that is called as surjective functions.
So surjective, so another name for it which is called onto, so a function is called surjective
or onto if the co-domain is equal to the range.
The co-domain of the function is equal to range that means you take the co-domain and
suppose there are no elements in the co-domain which is not related to anything in a from
the domain, then it is a surjective function.
So whenever you have a surjective function, you can have there are elements here and some
element is always mapped there.
So some element there is at least one element from there which maps here, so that is a surjective
function.
There is no like elements sitting in the range, sitting in the co-domain which is isolated
which is not connected to anything in the domain, then it is called a surjective or
onto function.
So for example the example 2 is a onto function, a, b, c all the elements in the co-domain,
the co-domain is equal to the range.
So another important type of functions you need to understand is injective functions.
So injective functions is also called one-one functions.
So injective functions are functions where I mean there is for every 2 elements of the
domain, the range values should also be different.
So you have, so this is not a one-one function, why?
Because these 2 elements, because these and this element match the same element here.
In a one-one function, you should have that every element here should map to some other
element there and of course this place could have, the range could have, the co-domain
could have additional elements.
So every element, every element of domain maps to a distinct element of the range of
the co-domain or range.
So this function that you see here is I mean a one-one function because every element of
the domain is mapping to a different element of the co-domain but it is not surjective
because there is this isolated, there are 2 isolated elements here and here which makes
the co-domain not equal to the range.
So if a function is both injective and surjective, so for example you can see this function,
this function, this example that we saw is a function which is both injective and surjective.
So if a function is both injective and surjective, it is called bijective.
Both injective and surjective, so a bijective function is a function which is both injective
and surjective that means every element of the domain maps to a distinct element of the
range and the range is equal to the co-domain, there are no isolated elements in the co-domain.
So a function can be only surjective, a function can be only injective and it can be both together
and we saw examples on this.
So what else, so finally we will also come to what is called the inverse of a function.
So inverse of a function, so first we will define inverse for a bijective functions.
So inverses are typically defined for bijective functions.
First we will define it for bijective function and then we will see how to generalize it
for all functions.
So for bijective functions, so if you have a function from A to B, so A is the domain,
B is the co-domain and if it is a bijective function, the range is equal to the co-domain.
Now for a bijective function, inverse of a function is another function.
So inverse divided by F inverse is just another function and what is that function?
The domain of the inverse function would be B and the co-domain of the inverse function
would be A. So for a bijective function, just you need to interchange the domain and co-domain
and what is that function?
So let us see an example.
So we already saw this particular example.
So 1, 2, 3 is mapped to, so we had this function G where 1, 2, 3 is mapped to BCA.
So this is the function F and what is F inverse?
F inverse is just you need to interchange.
So BCA, so the domain is B and the range is this capital A. So basically, so these
are the elements of B and these are the elements of A. So it becomes 1, 2, 3.
So inverse is nothing but the reverse mapping and you can easily do it for a bijective function.
So for any bijective function, the picture looks like this.
You have a set A, you have a set B and there is, yeah for every element in the left hand
side, there is a unique element on the right hand side and there are also no isolated elements
in B. So we can, so when you have F, these arrow marks were from left to right.
When you have the inverse, the arrow mark will be from right to left, that is it.
You just need to invert the arrow marks.
This you can do because there is no isolated elements in B. So what happens when you want
to define inverse for nonbijective functions.
So inverse for nonbijective functions.
So how do you define inverse for nonbijective functions?
So what all things can happen?
So if it is a nonbijective function, so you might have a function from let us say this
is A, this is B and there is some elements in A, there is some elements in B and there
might be like multiple things might be mapping to the same element here and this guy is mapping
to there and so this guy is mapping to here.
So you have multiple elements mapping to the same element.
Let us number it also.
Let us say this is 1, 2, 3, 4 and this is A, B, C, D, E.
So what can we say about the inverse?
So let us say you have, we want to do F inverse of A. So F inverse of A is, there is nothing
to worry about because there is only a unique element which maps to A, which is 3.
You can say it is 3 and be happy about it.
But if you do F inverse of B, there are 2 elements, 1 and 2 both maps to B. So if you
want to define F inverse, should I define it to 1 or 2?
Now it is not clear what to define it to.
So F inverse, when you have a nonbijective function, B is, F inverse of B is mapped to
the set of 1 and 2.
So F inverse might give you a set of elements in a nonbijective function.
So strictly speaking, I should write set here also.
If it is a singleton, then it is well and good, otherwise it might be a set of more
than 1 elements.
So what is F inverse of E?
There is no element which maps to E. So F inverse of E is nothing but the empty set.
And you can also generalize inverse for a subset of elements of B.
So for example, we can say F inverse of B, E. So this is nothing but, this is defined
as F inverse of B union F inverse of E. F inverse of E happened to be the empty set.
So this is nothing but 1, 2.
So what is F inverse of A and B?
So F inverse of A and B is F inverse of A which is 3 and F inverse of B which is 1 and
2.
It will be 1, 2, 3.
So now we can generalize F inverse to subsets also.
So F inverse strictly speaking is a function from the power set of B to the power set of
A. Take any subset of B, I can construct the inverse by looking at all the elements which
is connected to these elements in B. So that is all.
That is all we are closing the first subsection of the course.
So in this video, we looked at functions.
Functions are just relations which has a particular property that every element of the left hand
side is mapped to some element on the right hand side.
So we saw a few examples.
So a function can be surjective that is codomain equal to range.
It can be injective that is it is one to one.
If every element is mapped to some element on the right, it is one to one or it can be
bijective.
Bijective, it has to be both injective and surjective.
So then we looked at the inverse of the function.
So I just forgot to include one more part as part of the video.
So finally I want to include one more topic which is composition of functions.
So given functions, you can do what is called the composition of functions.
So what do you mean by composition of functions?
So suppose you have a function F from A to B. There is a set A and there is a set B is
the codomain and there is a function G which is a function from set B to set C. So you
have two functions.
So the way to think about it is there is a set A, there is a set B and there is this
I mean there is this.
So F has for every element in A, there is some arrow mark going to B. There is some
line going to B. So every element there is some line going to B. So there might be some
extra elements in B which I mean no element in A maps to and G is another function which
maps from.
So this is A, this is B and this is C. So G might map this thing to some other elements.
So for example let us say this is 1, 2, 3. This is A, B, C, D. This is P, Q, R, S. So
A is nothing but the function 1, 2, 3, A, B, C. So 2 is mapped to A. So 1 is mapped
to C. So 1 is mapped to C, 2 is mapped to A and 3 is mapped to D.
So C is this element. And what is this function G? It maps A, B, C, D to, so A is mapped to
R, B is mapped to P, C is mapped to Q and D is mapped to S. So these are the two functions
A and F and G. So given these two functions, we can define a function called G of F. So
G of F is a new function. It is a function from A to C. And what is the function G of
F? It is take any element of A, follow the lines. There is a unique line going from A
to C in this picture. So it is nothing but, so what will be the table of that function?
to C and C is mapped to Q. So 1 is mapped to Q, 2 is mapped to A and A is mapped to
R. 3 is mapped to D and D is mapped to S. So this is the function G of F. So it is exactly
so G of F of a particular input x is nothing but G of F of x. So that is exactly the function.
So given two functions, you can compose it. And the interesting thing that you might notice,
if you compose bijective functions, you will get bijective functions. So composing bijective
functions, so that is if F and G are bijective, then the G of F will also be bijective, gives
bijective functions. So that is the important thing to note. And you can just look at the
figure and convince yourself about that. So we looked at inverse and finally we also looked
at function composition. So that is all for this video. Thank you.
