So welcome everyone, so last lecture we looked at sets and in the next lecture we will look
at sequences and relations.
So what is a sequence?
So in the last lecture when you looked at set we said a set is an unordered collection
of objects.
So you have a set a, b, c that is the same as the set b, c, a or in the order in which
these elements are written does not matter.
But when you look at the sequence, the sequence is typically denoted by round brackets, the
of a, b, c.
Now this sequence is not the same as the sequence b, c and a, these are two different sequences.
So sequences in the order matters, the order matters here.
And another thing that is interesting with sequences is, so you could have a sequence
where some of the elements repeat.
For example you could have a sequence which is a, a, b, a, c, this is a sequence.
This is a sequence of length 5, so has length equal to 5, sequence of length 5.
But if you look at the corresponding set, if you look at the set a, a, b, a, c, in every
element in a set has to be distinct.
So this is nothing but the same set as a, b, c.
So in sequences the length matters, but in sets even if you have repeating elements is
the same set.
So this set has size 3 only.
So these are two things that you need to remember about the differences between sets and sequences.
In sequences order matters, secondly in sequences elements can repeat and that is a new sequence
and the number of repetition counts in the length while the repetition does not matter
in a set.
So once we understand sequences, next thing for us to understand is what is called the
Cartesian product.
So given a set, suppose you are given this set a equal to a, b, c and you are given another
set b is equal to 0, 1.
So these are two different sets.
Now we can define what is called the Cartesian product.
The Cartesian product of a cross b is denoted by a cross b is a set where you have a length
to sequences where the first element is from a and the second element is from b.
So in this case it will be a, 0, a, 1, b, 0, b, 1, c, 0 and c, 1.
So that is a cross b.
What about b cross a?
So let us write down b cross a.
So when you do b cross a, the first element should be from b and the second element should
be from a.
So you should have 0, a, 1, a, 0, b, 1, b, 0, c and 1, c.
So the first element should be from b and second element should be from a and clearly
these two sets are not equal.
So a cross b is not equal to b cross a.
So these are two different sets and this is something that you need to remember.
So compared to set operations which were you could interchange the operands, here you cannot.
It matters.
So you can not just do cross products of sets, you can do cross products of more elements.
So you can do cross products of more sets together.
For example I can do a cross product of b cross b and I could again do another cross
product with b.
And what is that?
So if you substitute b, you will get 0, 1, cross 0, 1, cross 0, 1.
And what is the cross product?
These are lengthy sequences where the first element comes is 0, 1, second element is 0,
1, third element is 0, 1.
So let us write that down.
is 0 0 0, 0 0 1, 0 1 0, 0 1 1, 1 0 0, 1 0 1, 1 1 0 and 1 1 1.
So you have 8 elements which are all length 3 sequences of 0 and 1, these are binary sequences.
So there is actually short form notation for the set which is 0 1 cube, when you say 0
1 cube it is the cross product of 0 1 with itself 3 times.
Similarly, you can write 0 1 raise to n.
So let us say n is some number, then you say 0 1 raise to n, what is it?
It is a set of whole length n binary sequences.
It is a set of whole length n binary sequences.
So typically these are also called strings.
In computer science these are also called strings and it is a very important set in
computer science.
We will work on a lot of problems where the underlying set is a set of strings of length
n.
So that is what a Cartesian product is and there are many other examples.
So if R is the set of real numbers, then we can talk about R cross R and typically
it is denoted as R square.
And what is R square?
It is the set of all points in this plane, set of all points in the 2D plane, 2 dimensional
plane.
The set of all points for example in this tablet, pixels in this tablet is elements
of this set.
Similarly you can say R3 which is a set of all 3D points.
So you will have x, y and c and these are all examples of cross product.
So let us also prove important relation, important identity for cross products which is suppose
you have a set A and you are taking a cross product with B union C. So you have 3 sets
A, B and C and you are taking the cross product of A with B union C. How is this related with
A cross B union A cross C?
Is there any relation between these 2 sets?
The claim is they are equal.
So every element in the left set is also there in the right set and every element in the
right hand side set is also there in the left hand side set.
So we will just prove this by means of pictures.
So let us just draw the picture of both sides.
So here what is this picture?
So you have the set A, this is the set A and there is a set called B and there is a set
called C. And what is A cross B?
So A cross B you will have all pairs where the first element comes from A and second
element comes from B. In a such pair I will draw by a line.
So I will use a different color.
Let us say you have all these points.
So all pairs of points where the first element comes from A, second element comes from B
is there in A cross B. So this green is the A cross B.
Similarly, so what is A cross C?
It is all elements where the first element comes from A and second element comes from
C. So it is this element is there, this element is there, this element is there, this element
is there, all these elements are there in A cross C.
And let us again draw the left hand side as a picture.
So you have a set A here which is the same set and then you have the set B union C. So
there is B here and C here and they might have some intersection.
So you have C might be up till here.
So C might be up till here and B might be up till here.
So this is basically B intersection C. So this part is B, this part is C and that is
B intersection C.
And what are the edges here?
So you have all pairs of vertices where the first element comes from A and second element
comes from B union C. So you have all these edges here, all these pairs of tuples are
going to be there.
Now take any of the green lines, the green lines is going to be there in the left hand
side.
If there is a line here, that line is also there in the left hand side.
All the red lines are also there in the left hand side.
In fact the green line or the red line might repeat twice.
So it might be appearing twice in the right hand side but it might be appearing only once
here because in the intersection there might be only exactly one time.
So but we are only considering sets, even if you repeat basically you can erase all
the repetitions.
It is the same collection of elements as a set.
So every green and red arrow, red line is also there as a blue line here.
And similarly take any blue line, if the right hand side of that blue line is only there
in B, it is a green line appearing as green line in the right hand side.
If it is only there in C, it is appearing as a red line in the right hand side.
If it is an element of B intersection C, it will appear as both a blue line, both a green
line and both as a red line.
So from this picture we can show that this identity holds.
Similarly you can work out various identities where you have a mixture of union, intersection
and cross product happening.
So you will see more examples in the tutorials and quizzes.
So another important thing that you need to understand is suppose you take a cross product
of a set with the empty set.
Suppose we take the cross product of a set with the empty set.
So what is it?
It is a set of pairs where the first element comes from A and the second element comes
from the empty set.
But there are no elements in the empty set.
So effectively what will happen is this set is nothing but again this is an empty set.
This cross product does not have any elements because the right hand side did not have any
elements.
So that is these 2 things you need to remember.
So let us come to what is called a relation.
So a relation R
is a subset of, so a relation is defined on a set A is a subset of A cross A. Any subset
of A cross A is called a relation.
So that is R is a subset of A cross A.
So in A cross A there will be all elements.
The first element can be any element in A, second element can be any element in A. But
a relation might have only a subset of edges.
So you might have let us say the set A was let us say mean 0, 1.
So let us say you had 0 and 1 in the set A. So basically you had all the 4 combinations
in A cross A.
So this is basically 0, 1 square.
But you might have a relation which is a subset of that only.
So you might have a relation which is 0, 1, 0, 0.
So you might have a relation which is only the subset for example.
So this might be your R. R is a subset of 0, 1 square.
And this relation what is called the not equal to relation.
If A and B are related, if A is not equal to B. This is the not equal to relation.
So let us see few other examples.
So let us say you have the set A to be equal to A, B, C. And you can have the relation
R to be equal to the set A, A, B, B and C, C. That is a relation.
So in A cross A there will be like 9 elements.
But in this R it is a subset which has only the 3 elements.
And this is nothing but the equality of relation.
So A is related to B only if A equal to B. So A, B belongs to R if and only if.
So another way of writing A, B belongs to R is A related to B. We might use this notation
sometimes.
Instead of writing A, B related to R we might write A related to B. This is only if A equal
to B and that is what the equality relation is.
So let us see some other relation.
So let us say you have some relation R prime. R prime is A, B, B, C and let us say C, D.
So this is another relation.
And let us look at the set B which is the set of let us say 1, 2, 3.
Instead of A, B, C I will have 1, 2, 3.
So I can have another relation called R double prime which is again 1, 2, 2, 3 and 1, 3.
So you have this relation.
So what does this relation tell you?
It says that A is related to B if A is less than B. So this is the less than relation.
So we had equality relation where it consists of only equal elements.
You have less than relation in terms of numbers which is only if it is less than that relation
holds.
So similarly, so you can have a less than or equal to relation.
So what is the less than or equal to relation do?
So let us say in this set of 1, 2, 3, so 1 is less than or equal to 1, 2 is less than
or equal to 2, 3 is less than or equal to 3 and 1 is also less than or equal to 2.
2 is also less than or equal to 3 and 1 is also less than or equal to 3.
So you have yeah this is the less than or equal to relation yeah.
So every element is less than or equal to itself and of course the higher elements yeah.
So yeah so let us so these relations you can also draw as a picture yeah.
So for example yeah let us draw a picture for the first relation yeah.
So you have A, you have B, you have C, you have D yeah.
So every element of the set A you yeah I mean write down as points yeah and then all the
related elements you put an arrow mark yeah.
So A is related to itself in the equality relation yeah.
So let us say this is the relation R yeah.
So A is related to itself so you put a loop like this yeah.
So that is R yeah everything is related to itself yeah.
So what about the relation yeah let us say yeah let us give yeah so C is also related
to A. So let us so let us draw R prime yeah.
So you have A, B, C, D yeah.
So A is related to B and B is related to C and C is related to A yeah.
So actually there is no D at all here I am sorry yeah so there is only yeah so that is
the picture corresponding to relation R prime yeah.
So yeah similarly you can yeah draw this kind of pictures for every relation yeah.
So yeah there are relations of which has some specific properties also yeah.
So we need to understand few properties, few types of relation yeah.
So first is what is called a reflexive relation yeah when is a relation called a reflexive?
A relation is called reflexive if for all elements A belonging to that underlying set
A yeah A, A should belong to the relation yeah.
So for all the elements in the set A, A belongs to the relation it is called reflexive yeah.
So example the equality relation is reflexive yeah the equality relation is reflexive yeah.
If you look at the less than relation yeah so the less than relation is it reflexive
yeah there is no 1, 1 or 2, 2 sitting there yeah.
So the less than relation is not reflexive but let us look at the less than or equal
to relation.
So 1, 1, 2, 2, 3, 3 all of them are there yeah.
So the less than or equal to are reflexive but the less than relation is not.
So equal to and less than or equal to relations are reflexive but the less than relation is
not a reflexive relation.
Second type of relation that you need to understand is symmetric relations symmetric yeah.
So when is a relation called symmetric yeah.
So suppose there is a arrow from A to B yeah there is a A is related to B then B should
also be related to A yeah.
For all yeah A, B belonging to the relation yeah B, A should also belongs to the relation
yeah.
For all A, B if A, B is there in the relation then B, A should also be there yeah.
So if I mean equality yeah is this relation symmetric yeah.
So if the only elements in the relation are A, A, B, B, C, C. So A, A is there A, A is
still there this condition does not imply anything yeah.
But there is no A and B which are different such that A, B is there in the relation.
If there was a arrow mark across two points then the reverse arrow mark should also be
there but there is no arrow mark to begin with between two distinct A and B yeah.
So equality relation is trivially mean symmetric yeah.
So equality relation is symmetric yeah.
What about the less than or equal to relation yeah.
So what about the less than relation 1, 2 is there in the relation but 2 is not less
than 1.
If 1 is less than 2, 2 is not less than 1 yeah.
So less than is not symmetric less than and less than or equal to are not symmetric.
Finally we should also understand what is called the transitive relation.
So a relation is said to be transitive yeah.
Suppose there is a A to B arrow yeah.
Suppose A to B belongs to a relation yeah.
And similarly B to C arrow mark is also there in the relation yeah.
Then so if these two are there then A to C should also be in the relation yeah.
If A, B is there and B, C is there then A, C should be there in the relation yeah.
If A, B and B, C are not there then there is no condition to do.
If A, B is there and B, C is there then A, C should be there yeah.
So yeah is equality a transitive relation yeah.
So there is no A, B for A and B distinct yeah.
So only there is A, B where B will be equal to A and yeah so there is equality is trivially
transitive yeah by trivial yeah of the nature of the relation it is actually transitive
yeah.
What about I mean less than relation is it transitive yeah.
So 1, 2 is there and 2, 3 is there then 1, 3 is always going to be there.
1 is less than 2 and 2 is less than 3 then 1 has to be less than 3 yeah.
So similarly for the less than or equal to relation yeah.
So less than and less than or equal to are transitive yeah or old transitive relations
yeah okay.
So finally we need to we will close with what is called equivalence relation yeah.
So what is the equivalence relation if the relation satisfies 1, 2 and 3 reflexive, symmetric
and transitive then it is equivalence relation yeah.
It should be reflexive, symmetric and transitive all 3 properties should hold.
Then it is equivalence all 3 properties holds a relation satisfies all these 3 properties
then it is called a equivalence relation yeah.
So let us see one examples of equivalence relation and yeah stop at there.
So let us say example so let us look at yeah I mean yeah.
So let us say you have the set of I mean natural numbers yeah.
So let us say let us look at the set of integers yeah.
So let us say you have the set of integers set of integers yeah.
So that is 0 all the positive numbers all the negative numbers yeah all integer numbers
only.
So that is yeah denoted by the set z yeah and we will say that a is related to b given
2 integers a and b a is related to b if yeah a is equivalent to b modulo 3 yeah.
So you take the remainder after dividing by 3 if they are equal in a and b case then it
is yeah it is they are equivalent a is related to b yeah.
So is it reflexive is 1 satisfied yeah.
So a is related to itself yeah.
So if you take a and a of course modulo 3 they will have the same remainder yeah for
all a.
So it is actually reflexive.
Suppose yeah a is equivalent to b mod 3 yeah.
So a is equivalent to b mod 3 yeah then what does this mean?
This means that 3 divides a – b you take a – b you can actually divide by 3 yeah
because the remainders cancel off and whatever remaining will be a multiple of 3 yeah that
is what yeah a is equivalent to b mod 3 means yeah.
So if a divides a 3 divides a – b then 3 also divides b – a b – a is just nothing
but the negative of the number a – b yeah if 3 divides a – b then 3 should also divide
b – a it will be just the negative number yeah.
So this implies yeah b is also equivalent to a mod 3 yeah.
So if a is related to b then b is also related to a yeah.
So the second symmetric condition is also satisfied.
Finally let us look at transitivity that is the third condition yeah.
Suppose a is equivalent to b mod 3 yeah what does that mean?
That means 3 divides a – b that is what it means.
If b is equivalent to c mod 3 what does this mean?
That means 3 divides b – c yeah.
Now these 2 together imply that 3 divides a – b plus b – c yeah if you have 2 numbers
which are divisible by 3 if you add them it will still be divisible by 3 yeah.
This implies that 3 divides a – c yeah because b cancelled out.
This implies that a is equivalent to c mod 3 yeah that a and c has the same remainder
when divided by 3 yeah.
So if a is related to b and b is related to c then a has to be related to c yeah if the
relation is the mode relation yeah.
So I mean this modulo relation this modulo relation yeah this actually equivalence relation
yeah okay thank you.
So what did we cover in today's lecture yeah we looked at what is called sequences where
order matters and repetition also matters yeah and we looked at what is called the Cartesian
product yeah which is not symmetric yeah you cannot do the other way and it will not be
the same set yeah.
We looked at the set of real number set of binary sequences set of 3D points yeah we
looked at relations which are subsets of the Cartesian product yeah and yeah we saw how
to pictorially represent the relation yeah and we saw relations of 3 types yeah called
the reflexive, symmetric and transitive and if you have all these 3 properties together
it is called a equivalence relation yeah.
So that is all from today's lecture yeah and thanks.
