Welcome everyone, welcome to today's class. So last time we saw sets, relations and functions
and in this lecture we will look at counting, basics of counting and later on permutations
and combinations. So let us start with counting.
Counting is something that looks very obvious to us, but it can become tricky. So we will
understand the basic rules of counting and we will solve few problems only. So what is counting?
So counting is about finding the size of a set. So counting is finding the size of a set. But
typically a set is composed of smaller sets by using this operations. We saw various set
operations like intersection, union, complement, cross product and so on. So counting is finding
the size of a set from some basic component sets, from its components. So typically you
might have complicated set which is obtained by intersection, union, complement, cross product
of simpler sets and the question is the simpler sets we know how to compute the size and everything.
But then question is how do you compute, find the size of this complicated set and we will
find the basic rules for doing this in today's lecture. The first rule of counting is called
the multiplicative law. So what is the multiplicative rule? So multiplicative rule says that if
you take two sets A and B and take the cross product of it, the size of the cross product
is nothing but the size of the first set into size of the second set. So multiplicative rule
says that the size of the cross product is always the size of the first set into size of the second
set. Let us see an example where this we commonly use. So let us say you are going to a restaurant
and you are ordering. So the restaurant gives you a packaged meal where you have a appetizer,
let us say a soup, a main course and a dessert. So you have some choices for your soup. Let us
say for the soup you have a choice of tomato, let us say corn soup and let us say there is a chicken
soup. So you have these three options for the soup and you have, let us say for the main course,
so you have let us say pasta, let us say rice and let us say roti.
And let us say for the dessert you have only two options.
Let us say some cake or there is some other sweet let us say.
Now question is, so for the package you need to choose one from each. So question is how many
ways you can choose. So let us say this is the set A, this is the set B, this is the set C.
So you need to choose one element each from the set A, B and C to order with the package.
So you need to choose one of these things here and then you need to choose another thing here
and then you need to choose another thing here. So you need to choose these three things.
First element is for my soup, second element from the main course and third element dessert.
So you can choose any, so the first choice is any from this, second choice is any of these options,
third choice is any of these options and you have to make a, so you are mean,
meal is not, order is not complete if you only choose a soup and a main course.
You have to choose a dessert also. So how many ways you can do it? So very naturally you will
say it is, so the size of, basically we are looking at the size of the cross product of A,
B, C. So basically any order is kind of same as a cross product of A, B, C. So it is a sequence
of three elements, first element coming from A, second element coming from B and a third element
coming from C and size of this is nothing but by the above multiplicative rule, it is nothing but
size of A into size of B into size of C, which in this case is 3 into 3 into 2, which is 18.
So that is the multiplicative rule. If you want to, I mean if you want to choose two things and
the first thing should be this from the set A and second thing should be from the set B,
then you have to find the size of the cross product.
So this looks like a very simple thing but let us see few more examples.
Let us see few more examples. Let us say you want to find how many strings are there. So last time
we looked at strings. How many binary strings are there of a particular length n? So what is the set
that we are interested in? So it is a binary string. So every element is 0 or 1 and we are
looking at a sequence of length n. So you have to take n cross products.
And we are looking at there are n cross products here. So we are looking at size of this set and
size of this set is by the multiplicative rule is nothing but 2 into 2 into 2 into up to n times
which is equal to 2 raise to n. It sounds very nice and simple.
So now let us look at a little more involved example. Suppose you have a function. So how
many functions are there with domain let us say A, B, C and co-domain
1, 2, 3, 4. What domain and co-domain of a function is and what a function is? Question
is how many functions are there with domain A, B, C and co-domain this 1, 2, 3, 4.
So how do you find this? So let us again see what this means. So remember the way you write
a function is you have this. So again it looks like a similar diagram but actually it is very
different. So it is 1, 2, 3, 4. So and how do you draw a function? For every element in the left
hand side. So for every element in the set in this set A, we need to choose an element in the
right hand side set. So I could map A to any of the 1, 2, 3, 4. I had 4 choices. So I had 4
choices for A. Let us say I choose this and for a complete function, I have to choose something
for B also. Let us say I have chose this and I have to choose something for C also. C can be
again any of the 4 things. So now how many functions are there from A, B, C to 1, 2, 3,
4? I need to choose a value for A. I need to choose a value for F of A which can be any of
the 4 things. I need to choose a value for B which can be any of the 4 things and I need to
choose a value for C which is any of these 4 things. So in total, so I need to make a choice
for A which is among the set 1, 2, 3, 4. I need to make a choice for, so F of A should belong to
1, 2, 3, 4 and F of B should again belong to 1, 2, 3, 4 and F of C should again belong to 1,
2, 3, 4. You have to make all these 3 choices to define a function and there could be any of
these choices. There is no constraints on these choices. The total number of functions is again
by multiplicative rule will be 4 into 4 into 4. So total number of functions is,
so 4 into 4 into 4. That is 4 raise to 3. So this is how you count functions. So for every element
in the domain, we need to choose an element in the code domain. There are 4 elements in the code
domain. So I have to choose it. There are 4 possibilities for each element in the domain
and there are only 3 elements in the domain. So we have to do 4 raise to 3.
That is again a simple application of multiplicative rule. Now let us see the next rule of counting.
The next rule of counting is called the additive rule.
So what is the additive rule of counting? Additive rule of counting involves finding the
size of the set A union B when A and B are disjoint.
So when A and B are disjoint, we want to find the size of A union B and that is nothing but
size of A plus size of B. So size of A union B is size of A plus size of B.
So let us again go back to the previous question. There was this, I mean you are ordering in a
restaurant and you had, so earlier we said the order has to consist of a soup as well as a main
course as well as a dessert. But let us say, I mean the restaurant has a special offer.
If you choose any one item in the menu, there is a special discount. So in how many ways can
you get that discount? You are only allowed to choose one item in the menu. It can be a soup,
main course or a dessert. In how many ways can you choose one item in the menu?
So let us call this question 1. Let us say this is example 1.
How many ways to choose
a single item from the menu?
In example 1.
Now I could choose a soup which can be chosen in any of the three ways.
Or I could choose a main course which can be chosen in any of the three ways, so 3 plus 3 is 6.
Or I could choose a dessert which can be chosen in any of the two ways.
So the total number of ways I mean you can choose is size of A plus size of B
plus size of C which is 3 plus 3 plus 2 which is 8. So notice the difference.
Earlier in the first deal, you had to choose a soup, a main course as well as a dessert.
You need to make all these three choices. And then the number of possibilities was 3 into 3 into 2.
But now in this new deal, you only need to choose one item in the menu.
And menu has soups, main course and dessert. So you need to add. So there is a very different
calculation happening here. So let us see another example.
Let us say you have taken a quiz in the previous lecture. So let us say you are given a quiz.
And there is a question 1 which is a true or false answer. And question 2 is a MCQ questions
with A, B, C, D as answers. So you have a question 1 which is a true or false questions.
And question 2 is A, B, C, D answers. Now I can ask in how many, suppose you need to answer
question 1 and question 2. How many ways can you answer the quiz? If you need to answer both,
if you need to attempt both questions, Q1 and Q2, how many ways to answer?
So question 1 can be answered in 2 ways. Question 2 can be answered in 4 ways. So it is 2 into 4,
which is 8. But suppose I am giving you an option. You only need to answer the first question or the
second question. Not both. Only the first question or only the second question. So how many ways can
you attempt? If you need to attempt only one question, then the first question can be answered
true or false. The second question can be answered A, B, C, D. There are 6 ways to answer the quiz.
So that is the additive rule. So you do not need to choose element from A and B. Either you choose
from A or choose from B. And the important point to notice, here the sets A and B are disjoint.
It is a very important thing that you need to note. For all this to work,
the sets should be disjoint. So what happens when the sets are not disjoint?
So what happens when the sets are not disjoint? Then we need to come
to what is a rule called the principle of inclusion exclusion.
So what is the principle of inclusion exclusion? Suppose you want to find the size of A union B.
So you have the set A, you have the set B, and you have to find the size of the set A union B.
Now A and B are not disjoint. So maybe you will write size of A plus size of B.
This answer is not correct because this intersection area is counted twice.
That intersection area is counted twice. So what do you do? You subtract it once.
And this is what is called inclusion exclusion. But there are only two sets here.
But the thing is it will get little more complicated when you have three sets.
Suppose you have three sets here. You have one set here, two sets here, and a third set here.
Suppose you want to find the size of A union B union C.
There are three sets. Now let us try to find out the mean size of A union B union C.
Again we can write, let us say add up the sides A and B and C. That definitely covers the size
of A union B union C. That is the upper bound. At most, I mean if they are disjoint, it will be
size of A plus size of B plus size of C. But they have this intersection. So it has to be less than
that. So we need to subtract something from this. What do we need to subtract? We have to subtract
A intersection B. We will subtract B intersection C. And we will subtract C intersection A.
Let us do that. Minus A intersection B minus B intersection C minus C intersection A.
We have subtracted. So the intersections were added up twice. So we have subtracted it
out once. But there is a problem here. If you look at this region, which is the intersection of all
three, when you added A, B and C, that region was added thrice. And when you subtracted A intersection
B, it was removed once. When you subtracted B intersection C, it was removed the second time.
When you subtracted C intersection A, it was removed the third time. So when you added up A,
B, C, you added it three times. And then you subtracted it also three times. So it is not
appearing in this right hand side. So we need to add it back. So let us add it back plus
A intersection B intersection C.
And that is what inclusion-exclusion says. If you take the union of multiple sets,
which may not be disjoint, if you want to find the size of it, we need to do this alternating
summation. You need to add all the sets together first. Then you need to subtract the intersections,
pairwise intersection, like two-wise intersections. Then you need to add back the three-wise
intersections. If there are multiple sets, you have to keep doing it alternatively.
So you will add back the three-wise. Then you will subtract back the four-wise and so on. So
we are only doing it for three-wise. And typically, you will only see it for three-wise maximum.
So let us see an example of this. So suppose you want to find the number of strings of length 4.
So how many
binary strings? Binary strings are there
where of length 4 that has two consecutive ones. So you need to find the number of length,
number of strings of length 4, 0, 1 strings of length 4 such as it has two consecutive ones.
How do you count this? One way is you write down all the 2 raised to 4 strings. The total number
of strings is 2 into 2 into 2 into 2, 2 raised to 4 strings. That is 16 strings you write down
and figure out which one has consecutive ones or not and just count it like normally.
But let us use these principles to count this. You will use the principle of inclusion exclusion
to count this. So we have these four positions. So there is the first position, second position,
third position, fourth position. Here it can be 0 over 1, here it can be 0 over 1,
here it can be 0 over 1, here it can be 0 over 1.
Now A1, let it be the set of strings where there the first and second position together was 1.
So A1 is the set of strings where these two were ones and we do not care what happened here.
The first two elements are ones. All those kinds of strings is a set A1. Now A2 is the set of
strings where these two elements are ones. The other two places we do not care. And A3
is the set of strings where the first two places we do not care what the value is.
The last two places it is ones. So if the two consecutive ones occurred, it is either in the
first two positions or the second and third position or the third and fourth position.
So the set of strings we want. So this set, this set the answer, so S is let us say is the answer
or A is the answer. The set we want to count A is basically A1 union A2 union A3. The set we want
to find that is the set of all strings which has this property is basically A1 union A2 union A3.
And what is the size of that set? So if you take the size of A by principle of inclusion exclusion
is size of A1 plus size of A2 plus size of A3. And you will have all these things coming in.
So you will have A1 intersection A2 intersection. So you will have A1 intersection A2 minus A2
intersection A3 minus A3 intersection A1 and plus A1 intersection A2 intersection A3.
What is the size of A1? And two positions it is one. The other two positions we do not care.
Other two positions the value can be 0 or 1. So there are two into two. The size of A1 is
basically so the size of A1 is equal to the size of A2 is equal to the size of A3. Why? In each of
the three situations there are two positions which are which we need to fill in. Which can be any of
the two possibilities which is two into two. We have to choose a value for here as well as here.
Here and here here and here. So each of this is basically it is four. What is the A1 intersection
A2? When you do A1 intersection A2 what are we saying? The first two positions it should be one.
So that is a set of strings where the first two positions it is one. But A2 also says the third
position also should be one. There is only one place we can fill in a 0 or 1. So the size of
A1 intersection A2 is only equal to two. And you can verify by similarity using the same principle
A2 intersection A3 as well as A3 intersection A1 is also two. Because in three places the value
one is filled in and the other place we can choose 0 or 1. And what is the size of A1 intersection
A2 intersection A3? So what is that set A1 intersection A2 intersection A3?
A1 says first two positions should be one. A2 says second and third position should be one.
A3 says the third and fourth position should be one. The only way all these conditions are satisfied
is everything is a one. All the four positions has to be one. The size of A1 intersection
A2 intersection A3 is only equal to one. There is only one string which satisfies all the three
conditions. Now let us come back here. So what is the size of A now? It is basically
four, three into four. Three times you need to add four. And then you need to three times
subtract two and then you need to add back one. So that is 12 minus 6 which is 6 plus 1 is 7.
There are seven strings which has two consecutive ones.
Yeah the seven out of the 16 strings has two consecutive ones. So yeah so yeah three fourths
are 12 minus 6 yeah that is right 7. So yeah so now we also know so we saw in this lecture
yeah how to count. So if we first show the multiplicative rule so when we need to choose
one element from the set A and another element from the set B
then we are interested in finding a cross product size of the cross product which is
size of A into size of B. When we are interested in yeah when you are required to choose
an element from A or an element from B yeah where A and B are disjoint sets yeah the number of
ways you can choose that element is size of A plus size of B yeah. And it is very important
that it has to be disjoint yeah and these two numbers are very different are doing adding to
numbers and multiplying to numbers are very different. So you need to be careful whether
yeah you have to do the addition or multiplication yeah so and finally when comes the principle of
inclusion exclusion and this happens when you have two sets yeah and you are allowed to choose
from the first set or the second set yeah but unfortunately these sets have an intersection
yeah in general there will be multiple sets yeah and then how do you find the size of A union B
union C yeah you are you need to choose an element from A or B or C yeah and they have
a intersection yeah and then we need to compute yeah we need to compute the intersections
two wise intersection the three wise intersection yeah the two wise intersection should be
subtracted three wise intersection should be added yeah and yeah the single size should be
simply added yeah and then we can compute yeah and we used it compute the number of
strings with two consecutive ones yeah so yeah that is all for this video thank you.
