Okay, so in the last lecture, yeah, we looked at permutations, yeah, how to count bijections,
number of bijections. And yeah, in this lecture, we will come to what is called the binomial
coefficient. Last lecture, we saw specific notation that we introduced, right, number of
permutations, yeah, on a set of size n is n factorial. And we also introduced the notation
called NPK, yeah, which is, yeah, I mean, when you want to only arrange k items. Finally,
we also introduced the, I mean, notation for, yeah, so we introduced n factorial and NPK,
yeah, good, yeah. So, now, let us come to finding, yeah, finding subsets, yeah.
So, let us say how many subsets, how many subsets are there of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
How many subsets are there of a set of, let us say, size 5. The first element can be there or
not, second element can be there or not. So, there are 5 choices to be made, each is 0, 1,
it is 2 raise to 5. And yeah, this was covered in the first video itself in this section.
Now, the question here is little bit more different, yeah, how many subsets
of size 2. We are not interested in all the subsets, we are only interested in subsets
of size 2, yeah. So, let us try to count, yeah. So, any subset of size 2, yeah, is of the form
A comma B, yeah, the set is of size 2, right. So, there is one element and the second element
is A comma B, yeah. Now, A is any element of this 1 to 5, yeah. So, this any element of 1 to 5,
A can be any element of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, yeah. So, there are 5 possibilities that we need to,
yeah, account for. And what is B? So, B, yeah, B can it be any element of 1 to 5, B has to be
different from A, yeah. So, it is any element of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, yeah, with A removed, yeah.
So, this notation is a new notation I am introducing, yeah. So, this is saying that
you take the set 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 with A remote and that is this notation, yeah. So, how many
possibilities? So, the number of ways is there are 5 possibilities for A, yeah, and there is
4 possibilities for B. So, you might think this is the answer, yeah, but there is a problem here,
yeah. This is not the answer. So, this is actually wrong because if you took A is equal to,
let us say 1 and let us say I took B equal to 5, this was counted, yeah, I could set A equal to 1
and I removed A equal to 1 here and then B equal to 5 was chosen, yeah. But what if
A was chosen to be 5? A was chosen to be 5, that was another possibility, yeah, and B could have
been chosen to be 1. Remember that when we did this accounting earlier, yeah, this counting,
yeah, which accounted for these two separately, both was accounted separately.
Both of these two cases were accounted separately, yeah, but this particular two cases
was exactly accounted two times, yeah. So, every situation AB, a BA was also accounted
separately, yeah. So, the right answer, yeah, the correct answer for the number of ways,
yeah, of choosing a two element subset from a 5 element set is nothing but 5 cross 4 divided by
2, yeah. So, that is 20 divided by 2 which is equal to 10, yeah. So, that is the, yeah,
so that is the number of ways you choose a 5 element set, 2 element set from a 5 element set,
yeah. So, what happens in general, yeah, so this is what we did previously also.
We saw an example and we want to find it for an arbitrary set, yeah. So, how many subsets
how many subsets of size k for an n element set,
yeah. So, obviously n has to be greater or equal to k for this to work,
you have a large set of size n and you are picking k elements subset from it, yeah.
So, again what do we do, yeah. So, I will pick some k elements, yeah. I can arrange k elements
from a, I mean, yeah, n element subset in NPK ways, yeah. NPK is arrangements
of k elements from n elements.
That was what was NPK that we discussed in the last video, yeah. But in arrangements,
the order of the elements matter, yeah. So, how many elements, how many different
arrangements are there of k elements? There are k factorial arrangements, yeah. So, number of ways,
yeah, that is the answer for this question should be NPK, yeah. But in NPK, it is the
number of arrangements, the order matters. Each element in NPK was repeated k factorial times
because there are k factorial different arrangements, yeah. So, you have to divide this by k factorial,
yeah. So, let us say in this case, we had only a and b, yeah. There are two different arrangements
for a and b, a, b and b, a, and it was counted twice. So, we had to divide by 2 here, yeah.
In this case, there is a subset of size k. So, there might be a, let us say k equal to 3,
then you will have a, b, c. Let us say if k equal to 3, yeah, we will have the set a, b, c,
it might be come up in a different order b, a, c and it might come up in a different order c, b, a,
yeah. So, actually more. How else it will come? So, it will be a, c, b, yeah. There will be
b, c, a and then there will be c, a, b, yeah. So, when you, you could have chosen the mean,
you have. So, for every arrangement, there is actually 5 more arrangements which correspond
to the same set, yeah. So, you need to divide by 3 factorial, so that we remove this over counting,
yeah. So, the number of ways you can choose a k element subset from a n element subset
is n p k divided by k factorial, yeah. So, there is another way to write it, yeah.
So, if you remember n p k was nothing but n factorial divided by n minus k factorial,
yeah. And then there is a new k factorial sitting for this particular mean counting, yeah.
So, another way to write it is if you remember this n factorial by n minus k factorial was
nothing but n into n minus 1 into n minus 2 into up to n minus k plus 1, yeah. This was this much
part of it, yeah. And then you have k factorial in the bottom which is k into k minus 1 into
k minus 2 into up to let us say 2 into 1, yeah. So, this is another way to write, yeah,
the number of subsets of size k from a n element set, yeah. So, another way to think about it
is that this is the number of ways of choosing
k elements from n elements.
The number of ways of choosing k elements from n elements, we are only choosing, yeah. So, let us
say you are doing a card game, yeah, and I had to give you mean 13 cards. I will just pick 13
cards and give you. The arrangement of the cards that you got does not matter. You might arrange
in different ways in your hand, yeah, but that does not matter, yeah. You only need to choose
the k cards, yeah. So, different arrangements of your hand corresponding to the same hand only,
yeah. So, here we are not interested in the arrangement because it is only interested in
the set of cards that you got, yeah. So, this is the number of ways of choosing k elements from
n elements, yeah. So, yeah. So, this also has a notation to it, yeah. So, another notation for
writing this is called n c k, yeah. So, n p k is the number of permutations of n elements of
k elements from n elements and n c k is the number of ways of choosing k elements from n elements
without arranging it, yeah. And, yeah. So, this is again some textbooks use a different notation
which is, yeah, this, yeah. So, if you have a big round bracket with n on top and k on bottom,
it just means n c k, yeah, which in turn just means this particular formula, yeah. So,
these formulas are very important because they come very often, yeah, in computer science and,
yeah, in many of the portion that is covered later in the other courses, okay.
So, let us come to, yeah. So, some examples, yeah. So, let us count something, yeah. So,
we will use a slightly different technique for counting, yeah. This is called counting using
bijections, counting using bijections. Let us illustrate with the example and that will make
it clear what this method is, yeah. Suppose we want to find how many binary strings,
so we already discussed what a binary string is, a 0 1 string of length n
with exactly k ones, yeah. So, let us set n to be equal to, yeah, initially we will set n to be
equal to let us say 5, exactly k equal to 2 ones. There are how many binary strings of length n
equal to 5 with exactly k equal to 2 ones, yeah. So, yeah, how do we solve this, yeah. So,
the claim is we actually already solved this problem, yeah. We can already solve,
mean map this problem to the previous problem that we discussed. How do we map it, yeah.
Let, yeah. So, let the set of all binary strings, yeah. So, let us call this set B, yeah. Let B be
the set of all such strings, let B be the set of all such strings. Let B be the set of all such
strings, yeah, of length of 5 and exactly 2 ones, yeah. And let A be the set of all,
yeah, 2 element subsets of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. So, B is the set of all such strings of length 5
and 2 ones and A is the set of all 2 element subsets of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, yeah. We already know
how to count A, yeah. So, if we somehow we can relate A to B, then maybe we can also count B,
yeah, the count size of B, yeah. So, what we will do is we will give a bijection between B and A,
yeah. So, the method is give a bijection between A and B, yeah. How does it help us?
If we give a bijection, how does it help us? Remember in the previous video we discussed,
if you have a bijection, then the size of the domain and the size of the core domain has to
be the same, yeah. For a bijection, size of the domain, yeah, has to be equal to the size of the
core domain, yeah. There is no other option. It is injective and surjective, yeah. For a bijection,
the size of the domain has to be equal to the size of the core domain, yeah.
And yeah, so the size of the domain is A, size of the core domain is B and the size of A has to
be equal to size of B and we already know how to count A, which is just phi choose 2, yeah. Now,
to give a bijection, yeah. So, let us say you have a string, yeah. So, you have a string of length 5,
yeah. So, there is length 5 string, yeah. So, this is the first position,
this is the second position, this is the third position, this is the fourth position,
this is the fifth position. So, there are five positions, yeah.
And there is exactly 2 1s, yeah. So, let us say the one is sitting here and there is another one
one sitting here and these two are zeros. This is one such string. Let us map the string
to a set. So, this string is being mapped to the set. So, there is exactly two positions
where the string is 1 which is 2 and 5. So, we will map it to a set 2, 5. The claim is,
given any string, take any string, any of the 5 chose 2 strings which has 5 positions and
exactly 2 ones, I can map it to a corresponding 2 element set. How? I look at the 2 positions
where the 1 is there and make it into a set. This is a subset of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
And so, there is a function from the set B to the set A. So, we have defined a function
from the set B to the set A. The claim is, this function is a bijective function. Why?
So, given any string, I am getting a set, right? And from this set, I can take any string
and I can recover the string. Why? I know the two positions where the 1 needs to be
put and all the other position, I can put 0. So, from this 2, 5, I can recover the string.
How? I just write down a string with 5 length where ones are there only in the positions
which is there included in the set. This will give you a string of length 2. So, if I take
a string, apply that function, I am actually able to invert. So, the F inverse which is
a function from B to A also exists. So, given this function F, the inverse of the function
is easy to compute which is just given a set of 2 elements, just put ones in those 2 places
and 0 otherwise. So, given a function, there is a inverse mapping
from B to A and remember, inverse mapping is only possible for bijections. So, F inverse
from B to A is only exists for bijections, only exists for bijections. That means, if
the function F is bijective, it is 1, 1 and 1, 2. If it is 1, 1 and 1, 2, then the size
of A has to be equal to size of B which is equal to n choose k which in this case is
5 choose 2 which if you apply the formula, it is just 5 into 4 divided by 1 into 2 which
is 10. So, this is an interesting way of counting which is suppose you want to count the size
of a set and suppose you can come up. So, you want to count the size of the set B which
is we do not know, but suppose there is another set A which you can easily count and suppose
there is a bijection from B to A, then the size of the set B is equal to size of the
set A and that is what we did here. So, this mapping between sets and strings
is a very important mapping and it is very, very common in computer science. So, this
mapping from the set to the string is called a characteristic vector mapping. So, this
mapping, so you will see this mapping in many other places when you go through algorithms
course even in machine learning courses you will see this. So, any set can be represented
by a corresponding binary string where you put only ones in the places for the elements
in the set and zeros in the other elements. So, we know how to what is the number of k
element sets I mean from n element sets also the number of strings, binary strings with
exactly k ones and both are equal to n choose k.
So, let us see some properties of this binomial coefficient. So, this n choose k is called
the binomial coefficient. So, this is also called the binomial coefficient. So, this
is a number which comes up in many places as you will see soon. So, let us see some
properties of this binomial coefficient. So, the first important property of the binomial
coefficient. So, the first important property of the binomial coefficient is you choose
n choose k. What is n choose k? So, one example one interpretation that we just gave this
it is the number of binary strings of length n with exactly k ones. Now, if you take a
binary string and if you take a binary string and if you take a binary string and if you
take any string with exactly k ones and make all the zeros to ones and ones to zeros you
flip all the bits what you get. So, suppose you are given a string with some zeros and
some ones let us say there are k ones here if you flip all the bits what you get you
will get another string with n minus k ones you will get another string with n minus k
ones and given this flip the string you flip it again you can go back to the original string.
So, you do a flip you will get the string you do again a flip of zero one you will get
back the original string. Take the string flip zeros to ones you will get and ones to
zeros you will get the string take the string flip all the ones to zeros and zeros to one
you will get back the original string. So, this map so you have found a biject you have
found a bijection from the set of all strings with k ones and the set of all strings with
n minus k ones. So, this is a bijective mapping that means the set of all strings with exactly
k ones should be equal to the size of that set should be equal to the set of all strings
with exactly n minus k ones. So, this property is true. So, set of all strings with exactly
one one is equal to the set of all strings with exactly n minus one ones how we just
flip the any string of with one one to zero and once you flip you will get another string
with exactly n minus one ones. So, this is the important property of binomial coefficient.
So, if you choose from a n element set if you choose all the n elements there is only
one way of doing it. So, this is equal to one and if you choose from a n element set
a one element set there are only n ways to do it. So, these are very obvious though the
first property is little bit tricky again you have to use the bijective property the
counting using bijection using this flip method. So, this was obtained using this flip bijection
bijective counting. Now, there is another very important property of binomial coefficient
which is Pascal's equality Pascal's identity.
So, the Pascal's identity says that take the binomial coefficient n choose k that is
equal to n minus one choose k minus one plus n minus one choose k. So, this is the binomial
coefficient. So, let us try to I mean kind of prove this identity. So, how why is this
identity true? So, let a be the set of all set of all strings of length n.
Then all strings of length n binary strings whenever I say strings if it is not specified
it is binary strings. The set of all length n with exactly k ones and we know the size
of A is n choose k. Let A1 is a subset of A be subset of A with the first bit to be
one. So, let A1 be a subset of A with the first bit to be one. So, let A1 be a subset
there is a set of elements in A some strings in A has the first bit the first element of
the sequence to be 0 some has the first element of the first bit to be one. If the first bit
is one then we will put it in A1. So, A1 is a subset of A similarly A0 be the subset of
A with the first bit to be 0. So, the first position you have this bits there are total
of n bits this first position if it is 0 it is in A0. If the first bit is 0 it is in A0.
First bit is one if it is in A1 and remember both A1 and A0 are subsets of A. Note that
A1 and A0 are disjoint A1 and A0 are disjoint. What do you mean? A1 intersection A0 is the
empty set. Why? The first bit has to be either 0 or 1 it cannot be both. A1 says it has to
be one A0 says it has to be 0. So, they are disjoint there is no way a string can be there
where the first bit is both 0 and 1 it has to be either 1 or 0. So, they are disjoint.
So, size of A is nothing but the size of A1 plus size of A0 this was one of the additive
principles of counting that is size of a set if it is a union of two disjoint set it is
just a sum of size of those sets. And what is size of A1? So, size of A we already know
is n choose k we made a bijection between this set A and the set of subsets of size
k of a n element set.
So, what is the size of A1? So, A1 you have so A1 basically is the set you know it removes
remember A1 is the set where you have this n positions yeah there are strings with n
positions and the first bit is 1 yeah and totally there are k ones totally there are
k ones that means this n minus 1 positions yeah should have k minus 1 ones. So, this
the first bit is 1 and then there is this n minus 1 positions which will have exactly
k minus 1 ones yeah. So, this set size of this set is n minus 1 choose k minus 1 yeah
how do you get the set A1? You choose a set of a string of length k mean n minus 1 with
k minus 1 ones and put a 1 in the front you will get a size any element of A1 yeah. So,
this means size of the set A1 is nothing but was the number of strings yeah of length n
minus 1 with k minus 1 ones yeah similarly A2 yeah if you look at A2 again it has n positions
yeah if you look at A2 again it has n positions and the first element is 0 totally there are
n positions yeah with the first element 0 we still need to have k ones in this n minus
1 positions yeah there should be k ones in this n minus 1 positions yeah. So, in this
n minus 1 positions we should have k ones how many ways you can choose k ones how many
strings are there of length n minus 1 with exactly k ones it is n minus 1 choose k yeah.
So, substituting this in this equation we get that n choose k is equal to n minus 1
choose k minus 1 plus n minus 1 choose k yeah. So, and that is called the Pascal's identity
and this is also very commonly comes up yeah in various places in computer science yeah.
So, finally I just want to cover one more thing a binomial coefficient comes up in few
other places yeah yeah so let us take yeah the following thing.
Let us say you take x plus y the whole square yeah. So, if you expand it you will get yeah
so you will need to take all sorts of products yeah. So, you will have yeah so you will need
to this is nothing but x plus y into x plus y yeah. So, you can take all the there are
four terms yeah you can choose any of the two from here any of the two from there so
there are four terms yeah. So, you will have x squared plus x y plus y x plus y squared
yeah and yeah normal multiplication x y and y x is the same. So, you get that x squared
plus 2 x y plus y squared yeah okay. So, 2 comes up there yeah. So, y square
what is x plus y the whole cube yeah again you have to do it three times yeah. So, you
will get that yeah so you will get x cube plus 3 x squared y plus 3 x y squared plus
y cube yeah the number 3 came in there yeah.
So, what is happening so can we write the expansion of x plus y whole raise to n yeah.
So, apparently the expansion of x plus y whole raise to n is summation over i equal to yeah
0 to n yeah n choose i yeah. So, the binomial coefficient n choose i x raise to i y raise
to n minus i yeah and these two examples are examples with setting n equal to just 2 and
3 yeah. So, 2 choose 1 is 2 that is why this comes here 3 choose 1 and 3 choose 2 are exactly
3 yeah. So, that is why those terms comes there yeah and yeah so and it is not hard
to prove this also yeah if you just think about it for a minute it is becomes very clear
yeah. So, how many times this term x raise to i
y raise to n minus i will appear in this expansion there will be a total of 2 raise to n terms
in this expansion yeah. So, I can choose x or y in each of the in from each of the
bracket and you will get a term in this huge summation yeah. So, if you choose x i times
yeah and i of this products yeah. So, you will have this yeah I mean n products if you
choose x i times and y n minus i times you will have this term yeah and how many ways
are of ways are there of choosing x i times you need to choose I mean an i element subset
of n yeah. So, this is a common yeah thing that yeah this is a expansion that you will
need to know yeah and it can be logically argued yeah if you understand the concept
of binomial coefficient being the number of subsets number of n k element subset of n
element set yeah. So, yeah that is all from this video. So, I will just recap what we
did yeah. So, we looked at what a binomial coefficient is which is the number of ways
of choosing a k element subset from a n element set for number of ways of I mean so the number
of ways of choosing k element set from a n element set that is what the binomial coefficient
is. So, there is a notation for it yeah there are
few formulas for it that you need to remember yeah and yeah. So, another thing important
thing that we covered is we can count using bijections yeah the set of strings there is
a bijection between the set of n element strings of length n yeah binary strings of length
n and the set of all subsets of a given set of a given set of size n yeah there is a bijection
and we use this bijection yeah to count the number of binary strings yeah of length n
with exactly k ones yeah which also happen to be equal to the binomial coefficient yeah
and we looked at few properties of binomial coefficients yeah in particular n choose k
is equal to n choose n minus k which we again proved using this bijective principle yeah
and finally we also looked at the Pascal's identity which is the important relation connecting
binomial coefficient n choose k and n minus 1 choose k minus 1 and n minus 1 choose k
yeah again we gave a proof of it here yeah finally we said that yeah binomial coefficient
appear yeah in expansions of x plus y raise to n yeah that is all from this video yeah
thank you.
