Okay, welcome again. So next, so the last video we looked at the basics of counting,
the multiplicative rule, the additive rule and the principle of inclusion exclusion.
In this lecture, we will continue with more interesting problems in counting. And first
is about permutations. So permutations and factorial. Permutation and factorial. Yeah,
so let us start with a problem. We want to know, so we already looked at bijective functions in
a previous video. We want to know how many bijective functions are there from let us say
1, 2, 3, 4 to another set A, B, C, D. Remember that can a function be bijective if the size
of the domain and the size of the range are different. Size of the co-domain are different.
It cannot. You cannot have a bijective function if the size of the domain and size of the
co-domain are different. Both of them, a bijective functions ensure that the size of the domain will
be equal to the size of the co-domain. But then how many bijective functions are there?
Well, let us apply the principles of counting that we discussed so far to get this number.
So you have this set 1, 2, 3, 4 and you have this other set A, B, C, D. 1, 2, 3, 4 is the
domain and A, B, C, D is the co-domain. Now the function might map. So the function has to map 1,
2, 3 and 4. There is no option. All the four things it has to map. So we have to take the
product of four numbers. Now 1 has to map. 1, there are four choices. 1 could map. So F of 1
has four choices. It can be A, B, C or D. So I need to pick one in a set of size 4. So there
are four choices there. And I have to pick a choice for 2. So let us say 1 was chosen. 1 was
it was mapped to B. F of 1 was equal to B. Now the choice for 2 should not include B. If 2 also
maps to B, then it does not become a bijective function. It does not become a one-one function.
Multiple elements are mapping to the same. It is not a one-one function. So 2 has to map to
something else other than B. So how many choices are there? 1, 2, 3. There are 3 choices for 2.
Let us say 2 was mapped to A. It could have been mapped to any of the things, but let us say 2 was
mapped to A. Now 3 cannot map to A or B because A and B are taken. If 3 maps to A or B, then you
have a problem. It is not a one-to-one function. So there are only 2 choices, which is C and D.
So there are only 2 possibilities for 3. And finally for the 4, there is only one possibility,
whichever is remaining. So this is how you count the number of bijective functions,
which is remember that the domain and the codomain should have the same size for a bijective
function. And this fact we will use again in the next video. And the way to count it is first make
the choice for the first element. There are 4 choices. Then the choice for second element is
only 3. If you remove whatever was chosen for the first element in the codomain, there is only 3
and so on. It keeps on decreasing by 1. So this bijective functions have another name.
So permutations is nothing but a bijective function. A permutation is nothing but a
bijective function. Only typically a permutation, the way you say it is, a permutation is a function
from 1 to n to 1 to n. I could have renamed this A, B, C, D to 1, 2, 3, 4 also. And it is a same
function. I am just relabeling A, B, C, D to be 1, 2, 3, 4. And typically whenever you talk about
permutation, it is a bijective function from 1 to n to 1 to n. In this case n was equal to 4.
So that is what a permutation is. And how many permutations are there? How many permutations
on the set 1, 2, 3 up to n? Let us find the number of permutations for the set 1, 2, 3 up to n.
And n equal to 4 would be a special case that we discussed just now. And what would be it? Again the
same argument. The element 1 could be mapped to any of the 1 to n. There are n possibilities. Now
the element 2 could be mapped to any of the things except to the one that f of 1 was mapped to. So it
is n minus 1 possibilities are there. Similarly for the third element, we have to remove the choices
for f of 1 and f of 2. So there are n minus 2 choices and so on up to 1. Finally there will
be only one choice because all the n minus 1 elements are taken. So the number of permutations
from 1 to n or the 1, 1, 1, 2 functions from 1 to n to 1 to n has this value. And for n equal to 4,
you got the special case that is written there. So this number comes up again and again in various
places. When we go through this course, it comes up many, many places in computer science. So there
is a special notation for this. So this number is called n factorial. An exclamation mark means you
have to do this operation. n into n minus 1 into n minus 2 up to all the way to 1. This is called
the factorial. And the factorial of 4 is 4 into 3 into 2 into 1, which is 6 4s are 24. And that
is what a permutation is nothing but a bijective function from 1 to n to itself. And the factorial
of n is basically the number of permutations. So another way to think about permutation is
of arranging n objects. Let us understand that. So suppose you are playing a card game. There
are 52 cards in a deck. So you have 52 cards. And you are arranging these cards from left to
right. I am arranging this on the table. I am just arranging this on the table one by one. So
how many ways can I keep the cards on the table? So the first I pick a card and arrange it and keep
it there. And then I will keep the next one. The first there was 52 possibilities. The next there
are 52 minus 1 possibilities and so on. So the number of ways of arranging n objects from left
to right is nothing but n factorial. I should say factorial. Factorial is also the number of
ways of arranging n objects. So if you have cards, so you can say the first card in the bottom is the
card number 1 and card number 2 and card number 3. So how many ways can you get a deck of cards of 52?
There are 52 factorial ways because you are just counting the number of functions from 1 to 52 to
1 to 52. That is another way of looking at arranging cards in a deck. It is just 52 factorial. So that
is what a permutation is. Now let us look at little more involved counting. Suppose you are
taking this 52 deck cards and suppose you are keeping only some cards on the table. I am just
taking some part of that card and keeping it on the table from left to right. I pick one card
from anywhere and keep it in the left side. Another card keep it in the left side. And let
us say I keep some 13 cards there. I pick some 13 cards and keep it on the table from out of
this 52 cards. Keep it on the table from left to right. Again let us try to count. How many ways
how many ways of arranging 13 cards from a deck of 52 cards? It is very important that all the
cards in a deck are different. In the 52 cards in a deck that you play in the card game is all
are different cards. There is no two identical cards. So I have to pick the one card and keep
it in the left side. So I could choose any of the 52 cards. So the first element is any of the 52.
The second element the deck that one card has removed. Only 51 cards are left. So the next
element is one of the 51 choices. Again now I mean 2 has been removed. So now there are only 50
choices and so on. So we are arranging 13 cards. So 13 cards will come up to how much? So 42 and
it will be 39. So 52, 51 up to 39 it will be. So 52 minus 13 is 42 minus 3 which is 39. So the
final card when you pick there are only 39 possibilities. Only 39 cards are remaining.
Initially there were 52 cards. It could be any of the 52 cards and so on. So is it 39 or 39 plus
1? Just a second. So it is n minus k. So this is one card removed and this should be actually
39 plus 1 if you count it properly which is 40. Because we are starting from in the first number
we are not subtracting anything. So there are total of 13 numbers here. So you can verify that
there are total of 13 numbers here. So that is the number of ways of arranging 13 cards.
So in general how many ways are there, how many ways of arranging k objects
from a set of n objects. So let us assume that now the set has now that you have a card of n
different cards where n is some number and all these cards are different and now you need to
arrange only k cards where k is the number of cards that you need to arrange. Of course k has
to be less than or equal to n. So first you can pick any of the n things, second you can pick any
of the n minus 1 things and similarly you have to do it k times. So if you do it k times you will
get up to n minus k plus 1. That is the number of ways of arranging k objects from a set of n
objects. So we can write this simply in terms of the factorial notation if you think a little
bit. So this is nothing but it looks like there is n factorial sitting there but you are not going
all the way till 1. So we are not going all the way till 1 but we are stopping at one particular
point. So this is n factorial. So what do you need to divide by? If you look at it you need to
divide by n minus k factorial. So you can verify. So n minus k is a number less than n. All the
numbers from 1 to n minus k is missing from here. So that has to be cancelled out and then you will
get this expression. So this expression has to be n factorial by n minus k factorial. So just to be
clear n up to n minus k plus 1 you have and then there is so let me write in the next line so that
it is more clear. So you have n minus 1 up to n minus k plus 1 and then there is n minus k and
then there is all the way to 2 and finally 1. And what is the denominator? It is n minus k into n
minus k minus 1 all the way to 2 and 1 and all these things need to be cancelled out and that is
what the left hand side is. So there is another common notation that is used for this particular
number. It is called n p k. So if you say n p k anywhere it is just this number on the left
hand side. These notation will be very commonly used throughout the course. So it is very
important that you remember this that these 3 things are exactly the same. So n p k is the
number of ways of arranging k objects from a set of n objects. And as you can easily see so n p
n if you are arranging all the n objects from the set of n objects it has to be n factorial.
That is what we said before. We are arranging all the elements. It has to be n factorial and
that is obvious right n minus n. So if you substitute k equal to n it is actually n,
n factorial that you get. And what about n p 1? Suppose we are only arranging one object
and there are only n possibilities which is what this formula also gives you. So it should be
pretty much clear that is what it is. So that is all for this video.
