Welcome again and in the previous lecture we got introduced to graphs, yeah.
Today we will in this video we will explore more about graphs, yeah.
So, let us see one example graph that we drew last time, yeah. So, let us say we have this
graph. So, you have 1, 2, you have 3 and you have 4, yeah. And let us say there is a edge
between 1 and 2, there is a edge between 2 and 3, there is a edge between 1 and 3 and
there is a edge between 4 and 2, yeah. And this is the undirected graph, yeah. Let us
say there is a edge, there is a edge both ways, yeah. This is the undirected graph,
yeah. So, this is the undirected graph, undirected graph where the vertex set is 1, 2, 3, 4, yeah.
And the edge set is the set 1, 2, the set 2, 3, the set 3, 1, the set 4, 2, yeah. So,
there are 1, 2, 3, 4 edges here and you saw 4 edges there, okay. That is the undirected
graph, yeah. So, yeah. So, these are called the edges of the graph, yeah. So, given this
undirected graph, so, we will say that the neighbors, the neighbors of the vertex 1,
yeah, is nothing but, yeah, it is the other edges it is connected to, yeah. It is 2, 3,
yeah. And suppose I will just introduce one more vertex, yeah. Suppose there is one more vertex 5,
yeah. And this 5 is not connected to anybody, okay. Let us just assume that, yeah. So, it might be
like the railway graph where there is, yeah, and 5 is somewhere in Sri Lanka, let us say, okay. So,
5 is not connected to 1, 2, 3, 4. So, what is the neighbor set of, yeah, let us say 2. So,
2 is connected to 1. So, directly connected to 1, 3 and 4, yeah. And what is the neighbor
set of 5, yeah. In this graph, 5 does not have any neighbors, yeah. 5 is like a isolated vertex,
yeah. It is the empty set, yeah. And that is the neighbor set. It is a set of all immediate other
vertices to which it has a direct connection, yeah, and that is called the neighbors, yeah.
Now, yeah, the next important thing we need to understand is called the degree of a vertex.
The degree of the vertex 1, yeah, is nothing but the size of its neighbor set. So, it is the size
of 2, 3, yeah, which is equal to 2. Yeah, similarly the degree of 2 is nothing but 3,
yeah. And what is the degree of 4, yeah. So, 4 is only connected to 1 vertex here, yeah.
The degree of 4 is 1, yeah. So, that is neighbors and degree, yeah. So, yeah, let us, yeah. So,
let us again draw the, I mean, map, yeah, of the railway connections, yeah. So, let us say there
is Madhubath, Delhi, Kolkata. So, let us say there is Mumbai, Hyderabad. So, there is Bangalore,
Chennai and Trivandrum, let us say, yeah. So, let us say we have, yeah, connections like this,
yeah, and yeah. So, this is the graph, yeah. Let us say this is the railway graph that we have,
yeah. So, let us say, so, this is the railway graph, yeah. So, typically we are not just
interested in like this graph, but we are also interested in the distance travelled, yeah. So,
you might have a distance also, yeah. So, this might be some, yeah, I mean, there might be some
distance here, yeah. So, there will be some distance between A, B and so on, yeah. So,
typically corresponding to every edge, there is also a distance associated with it, yeah,
and then it is called a, what is called a weighted graph, yeah, okay.
Now, I want to go from Ahmedabad to Chennai, yeah. Let us say I want to travel from Ahmedabad to
Chennai, yeah. So, how can I go from A to C, yeah? So, I can go from, yeah, I can first take the
edge, yeah, A to M, then I can, yeah, go from M to Bangalore and then I can go from B to C,
yeah. That is one way to reach Chennai, yeah. So, I can again, another way to reach Chennai
might be okay. I might go from Ahmedabad to Delhi to Delhi to Kolkata, Kolkata to Hyderabad
and Hyderabad to Chennai. That is another way to reach Chennai from Ahmedabad, yeah. Obviously,
you would prefer the first route because the distance travelled is much less, yeah.
So, any way you can reach from one vertex to another vertex through these edges is called
a path, yeah. So, these are called paths, yeah. These are called paths in a graph, yeah.
And typically when you have a path, you do not need to keep repeating this vertex. So,
instead of this, yeah, we can just say Ahmedabad, Mumbai, Bangalore, Chennai and instead of
this I can simply say Ahmedabad, Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Chennai, yeah. So, when you specify
a path, yeah, you need to specify a sequence of the nodes and between every consecutive
nodes there should be edge, yeah. Sequence of paths, it is a sequence of edge, sequence
of vertices such that between a very consecutive vertex there is a edge, yeah. So, this is
a path only if there is a edge a d, d k, k h and h c, otherwise it is not a path, yeah.
If I write a h, yeah, so a h, a h c is not a path. Why? Because there is no edge directly
from a to h, okay, yeah. So, that is called a path, yeah. Obviously, there are there can
be multiple path between vertices, yeah. So, then what we, yeah, so another important
term in graph that we need to understand is what is called cycles, yeah.
Suppose I want to go from Ahmedabad to Chennai and return back, yeah, a round trip, yeah.
So, how do I specify a round trip? So, yeah, these two vertices kind of gives you a round
trip, right. So, I go from Ahmedabad to Mumbai to Bangalore to Chennai and from Chennai I
go to Hyderabad, Kolkata, Delhi and back to Ahmedabad, yeah. So, a cycle, so this is
called a cycle. Cycle is again a sequence of vertices, yeah, but it cannot be just any
sequence of vertices. The first and last vertex should be the same. First
and last should be equal, yeah, and it should also satisfy the condition of path. That is
between every consecutive vertices, there should be a edge. Between every consecutive
vertex, there is an edge, yeah. So, cycle is again like a path, it is a sequence of
vertices where there is a starting vertex, ending vertex is also the same and between
every consecutive vertex, there is a edge, yeah. So, yeah, so that is what a cycle is,
yeah. So, suppose you have a graph which does not have any cycles, yeah. So, yeah, so there
is suppose you have a graph without any cycles. So, directed acyclic graphs, yeah. So, directed
acyclic graphs or DACs which also comes up very often in computer science, yeah, is a
cycle. A graph without any cycle is called a directed acyclic graph, yeah. So, the first
thing you should ask is when you hear about no cycle is, yeah, can a undirected graph
be a directed acyclic graph? Unfortunately, no. Why? Because the moment you have a, I
mean, a undirected edge from A to D, I immediately have a cycle. I can go from A to D and come
back, yeah. I can go from A to D and come back. So, no undirected graph unless there
is no edges in it, yeah, is a, I mean, directed acyclic graph, yeah.
All non-empty undirected graphs have a cycle, yeah. All non-empty undirected graphs have
a cycle. Why? Because if I have a edge from U to V, then I have another edge from V to
U also. So, that forms a cycle, yeah, okay. So, let us see an example of undirected acyclic
graph, yeah. So, you had this earlier graph of less than, yeah. So, you have this graph.
So, 1 is less than 2, 2 is less than 3, 3 is less than 4, 2 is less than 4, 1 is less
than 3 and 1 is less than 4, yeah. So, this is, I mean, yeah, a directed acyclic graph.
1 is less than 2 and 2 is less than 3. If you are only climbing up the ladder of less
than's, yeah, from finally, you cannot go from a greater number to a smaller number
in this graph, yeah. So, yeah, this particular graph is a directed acyclic graph, yeah, okay.
So, let us see another type of graphs. Another type of graph is called the connected graph.
So, what is a connected graph? A connected graph is a graph where there is a path from
every vertex to every other vertex. There is a path from every vertex to every other
vertex, yeah. There is a path from every vertex to every other vertex, then the graph is called
connected, yeah. So, let us see an example, yeah. So, this particular railway graph that
we drew, yeah, this particular railway graph is drew, is connected, yeah. There is a path,
yeah. So, these are all in cities in, yeah, in India and this graph is connected because
there is a path, there is a railway path you can go from one, there is a way of rail lines
where you can go from every one city or any other city, yeah.
But if I included a city in Sri Lanka into this, yeah, then immediately it is not connected
because there is no railway line between, yeah, a city in India to a city in Sri Lanka,
yeah. There is, yeah, you will need to travel over the sea at some point, yeah. So, that
is a disconnected graph, yeah. So, yeah. So, let us see another example, yeah. So, this
is a very common example that appears in computer science, yeah. This is what is called the
hypercube graph, yeah. So, what is the hypercube graph? In a hypercube graph, the vertex set
is a set of binary strings, yeah. It is a set of all binary strings of length n and
the edge set, yeah, is the set, is basically u, v, yeah, is a edge. So, there is a edge
between u, v, yeah, if u and v differ in exactly one position and v differ in exactly one position
, yeah. So, let us see an example. Let us set n equal
to 3 and let us draw this graph, yeah. So, you have the string 0, 0, 0, yeah. Then there
is a string 0, 0, 1. There is a string 0, 1, 0. There is a string 0, 0, 1. There is
the string 1, 1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1. So, I think I repeated one thing multiple times, yeah.
So, there is 1, 0, 0, yeah. So, I will write 0, 1, 1, yeah and then there is 1, 1, 1, yeah.
So, how many elements are there in the vertex set, yeah. It is 2 into 2 into 2, yeah. This
is how we counted and this is 8 elements and if you see there are 8 vertices in this graph,
yeah. And when is there a edge? So, if is there a edge between 0, 0, 0 and 1, 1, 0?
Why? I had to change 2 bits to get this go from 0, 0, 0 to 1, 1, 0, yeah. I had to make
this 1 and this 1. That is the only way I can go from here to here, yeah. So, they had
to different only exactly one bit, yeah, if there is a edge in this hypercube, yeah. So,
between these two there is a edge because only one bit flip I can, yeah, go from here
to here. Similarly, there is a edge here. Similarly, there is a edge here. Similarly,
there is a edge from all ones to these two, yeah, because the number of ones is exactly
one less and I can flip one bit reach there. What about these edges, yeah? So, I if I flip
this 1 to a 0, I will get this particular, yeah, vertex. Similarly, if I flip this 1
to a 0, yeah, I will get this particular vertex, yeah. If I flip this 1 to a 0, I will get
this vertex, yeah, and if I flip this 1 to a 0, I will get that vertex. Remember that
this hypercube graph is an undirected graph, yeah. If you flip one vertex, you will go
from one vertex to other. If you flip the same vertex, same bit again, you can come
back from that vertex to the next vertex, yeah. So, this is a good example of an undirected
graph. This is an undirected graph, yeah, because, yeah, if I go from a, if I flip a
bit in this string to get this string, I will flip the same bit again. I can go from this
string to this string, yeah, okay, good. So, yeah, what are the edges corresponding
to these? If I flip this bit, yeah, I will get this vertex, and if I flip the last bit,
I will get this vertex, okay. So, that is the hypercube graph, yeah, okay, good, yeah.
So, yeah, and if you look at a hypercube graph, it is always connected, yeah. Take any pair
of vertices, there is a path, yeah. So, how do you go from one, let us say, I want to
go from 0, 0, 0 to 1, 1, 1. What should I do? Let us flip the first bit, make 0 to 1,
I will go here, yeah. Now, I will flip the second bit, yeah. If I flip the second bit,
I will go from here to here, yeah, and I will flip the third bit, I will reach here, yeah.
So, I can always go from 0, 0, 0 to 1, 1, 1 by flipping one bit at a time, yeah. Even
if you are looking at the end, so, the hypercube with over n bit strings, we could do the same.
We could flip the first bit, second bit, third bit, fourth bit and so on, and I go from 0,
0, 0 to 1, 1, 1, yeah, and the same argument can go from any vertex to any other vertex,
yeah. So, why is there a edge from x to y, yeah?
Why is there a path from x to y, yeah? For all x and y belong to 0, 1 raise to n, yeah,
there is a path, yeah. How do you get the path, yeah? Let us say the string is 0, 1,
1, 1, 0, 0, yeah, and there is another string 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, yeah. How can I go
from this string to this string? So, first I will look at the first bit, they are the
same, I do not need to flip. Now, look at the second bit here, yeah, in my destination
the second bit is 0, yeah. So, I need to flip that bit. So, I will flip that first, yeah.
So, I will flip one bit at a time, yeah. So, I will go till there, there is a edge, these
two only different exactly one position, yeah. Next, I will compare, yeah. So, this bit is
already flipped, this bit is same, this bit is same and this bit position there is a difference,
yeah. So, I need to flip this bit, yeah. So, I can now flip,
yeah, and there is a edge between these two because these two only different exactly one bit,
yeah. So, okay. So, we flip that bit, this bit is same and we need to flip this bit now, yeah.
So, I can flip, yeah. So, between these two strings there is a only one bit position difference,
yeah. So, yeah. So, just to, yeah, and finally, yeah, I can flip this last portion, yeah, and
I will get this string. So, let me just highlight which are the first we flipped this bit to reach
here, yeah. Then we flipped, yeah, this bit, yeah, to reach here and then we flipped this bit to
reach here and finally, we flipped this bit to reach there, yeah. So, just to flip the places
one by one, yeah, to go from one string to another string, yeah. So, you can, there is always a path
in the hypercube graph from one string to another string, okay. Okay. So, that is all in this video.
So, let us just recap, yeah. So, we looked at different types of graphs, yeah, what is called
the undirected graph, yeah, where, yeah, you, whether, where the, I mean, the relation underlying
the graph is a symmetric relation, yeah. We discussed what is neighbors, what is the
degree of a node, yeah. We looked at what is called paths in the graph, yeah. So, paths in
the graph are, yeah, I mean, sequence of vertices, yeah, such that every consecutive vertex is a no
edge in the graph, yeah. Similarly, we looked at cycles, yeah, which was like round trips in
the graph, yeah. Again, this sequence of vertices, first and last vertex has to be the same and
consecutive vertex has to be an edge, yeah. We looked at directed or cyclic graphs, yeah,
which are graphs, directed graphs, where there are no cycles, yeah. An undirected graph, a
non-empty undirected graph always has a cycle, yeah, because, I mean, a symmetric relation,
you can go from A to B and then come back from B to A, yeah, okay. And finally, we looked at what
is called the connected graph, yeah. A connected graph, yeah, is a graph where there is a path
from every vertex to every other vertex, yeah. And specifically, we looked at what is called the
hypercube graph, yeah, which is a graph with 2 raise to n vertices, yeah, if you are looking
at n bit strings, yeah. And edge, if the 2 strings differ in exactly 1 bit position, yeah. We saw
this example and we show a, we gave an argument why there is a path from every vertex to every
other vertex. Why? If the, if you take 2 different strings, let us say, they differ in certain
positions, you can flip 1 bit at a time, yeah. And you can go from one vertex to another vertex,
such that, I mean, between every consecutive vertex, there is an edge, yeah, okay. That is all,
thank you.
