So, in the last 2 lectures, we looked at sets, relations and functions and later we looked
at counting objects, counting the size of sets. We looked at various different counting
problems. In this lecture, we will look at graphs. So, what is graphs? So, let us graphs
is very much similar to relations. So, just let us recall what a relation is, right. So,
we had a relation. Relation is defined on a set A. So, what is a relation set on defined
on a set A? A relation is nothing but a subset of A cross A, that is what we said. And let
us say we had one example relation. So, let us say your set is 1, 2, 3, 4. So, one of
the relations that we discussed is what is called the less than relation. So, what is
the less than relation? So, the less than relation. So, we drew it like this. So, you
drew a figure where you had A and A here. So, there is 1, 2, 3 and 4. Similarly, there
is 1, 2, 3 and 4 here. And you put an arrow mark if one is less than the other. So, there
is an arrow mark from 1 to 2, there is an arrow mark from 1 to 3, there is an arrow
mark from 1 to 4. Similarly, there is an arrow mark from 2 to 3 and 2 to 4 and 3 to 4. So,
there is no arrow mark from 4 because 4 is the largest number.
And how did they see this relation? So, this relation was basically the set 1, 2, 2, 3,
4 and 2, 4, 1, 3 and 1, 4. So, there is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. So, there are 6 elements here.
So, that is what the relation is. It is a set of ordered tuples. It is a ordered tuples
of size 2, both from A. So, a graph is exactly the same thing. Just that graph has little
more terminology associated with it. So, we use the word graphs in various specific real
world situations and we will come to in a minute. So, first I will define what a graph
is. A graph G is given by 2 things. It is a tuple of 2 things. What is called a vertex
set? So, V is called a vertex set. So, this is called a vertex set, vertex set. And E
is called the edge set. So, a graph consists of 2 things, typically called V called a vertex
set and E called the edge set. And in this case, the vertex set is nothing but the set
of elements A. 1, 2, 3, 4 is the vertex set. And what is the edge set? Edge set is nothing
but the relation itself. So, edge set is nothing but this relation itself. And that is what
a graph is. A graph consists of 2 things, V which is a vertex set, which is the underlying
set of the relation and E which is the set of ordered tuples, which is called the edge
set. So, let us see another example graph. So,
let us say you have. So, when you have a graph, you do not draw it like this picture. You
draw it slightly differently. So, when you have a graph, the picture of the graph looks
like this. You will have vertices drawn like this. You will have the name of the vertex
and you will have a circle around it and that is how. And then you put arrow marks
like this. 1 is less than 2, 2 is less than 3, 3 is less than 4, 2 is less than 4 and
1 is less than 3. And finally, 1 is also less than 4.
So, typically when you talk about relations, we draw a picture like this. But when you
talk about graphs, you typically draw a picture like this. So, that is what a graph is. Let
us see some very common examples. So, a very common example in practical use cases of a
graph is what is called the WWW graph. What is the WWW graph? It is the graph which represents
the entire internet. So, this is a very commonly used graph, whichever very large companies,
especially search engines use it, but there are several other applications of this.
There are several other companies internally use it. So, they index the whole entire internet.
And they will have the graph they represent. The vertex set is the set of all web pages.
Or URLs. It is a set of all web pages and URLs. So, you can imagine this is going to be a very
huge set. And what is the edge set? So, suppose there is a vertex u and there is a vertex v.
You put an edge from u to v if the web page u links to the web page v.
Whenever there is a link from one web page to another, you put an edge. And it is a huge graph.
We cannot draw it in this notebook and represent it or anything. But nevertheless,
this graph is very important and frequently used. Another example is a social network graph.
So, take a social network, let us say Facebook or LinkedIn or any such thing. So,
vertex set is the set of all users. V is the set of all users. And what is the edge set?
So, we will put an edge from u to v if v is in the friend list of u. Or if u follows v,
I will put an edge from u to v. So, this is the social network graph. And you can analyze
this graph and see various things. For example, how many people are following this particular
news. And analyzing these graphs allows you to find out what are the important web pages,
allows them to rank web pages, allows you to find interesting users, allows you to suggest,
allows these social network companies to suggest friends and so on. And this has enormous application
in advertising and many other areas. For example, Google news relies a lot on how
much news is important and how it links to other things. So, that is what a graph is.
So, you might, so all these graphs are extremely large. So, you can imagine these graphs which
will have many millions of web pages in the internet or there are millions of users,
maybe in the order of billions maybe. So, then how do you represent graphs? So,
how to represent graphs? How do you represent graph in a computer? It is represented as a
matrix called the adjacency matrix. So, what is the adjacency matrix? It is a matrix. So,
suppose there are n vertices, n is the number of vertices. So, let us say n is the number of the
size of the vertex set is n. So, let us say there are billion users in the social network,
then your n is 1 billion. So, you will have a two dimensional array or a matrix which is a square
matrix. There are n rows and n columns. And suppose there is, so it is a matrix,
the two dimensional array. The matrix M, there is a mean, there is, so it is a binary matrix of 0
and 1. It has only 0 and values. So, the matrix, the value of the matrix at the u, the u-th row
and v-th column, the u-th row and v-th column is 1 if u, v is there in the edge set and 0 otherwise.
For example, let us look at this particular example. So, there is 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3,
4 in this example. So, 1 is less than 2. So, 1 is not related to 1 at all. So, 1 is less than 2,
less than 3, it is less than 4. 2 is not related to 1, 2 is not related to 2 and so 3 is not,
3 is only related to 4 and 4 is not related to anything. So, that is the adjacency matrix
of this particular graph. So, you need this big huge two dimensional array, but it is a binary
two dimensional array. It is a binary matrix to store all these edges. So, what next? So,
there are different types of graphs. So, there are different types of graphs. So,
let us see a few types of graphs, types of graphs. So, the graphs, so far what we have
been talking about is what is called the directed graphs. So, far any general graph is called a
directed graph. It is called a directed graph because there are arrow marks. Every line from
here one node to another has a arrow mark also associated with it and that is called a directed
graph. But not all graphs are directed. So, there is what is called the undirected graph.
So, I will give you some examples first so that this is clear. So, let us have an example. Let
us say you have a map of rail connectivity. So, you will put a, so you have some cities. So,
I mean there is Delhi, there is hermandabad, let us say there is Kolkata, there is Hyderabad,
there is Mumbai, there is Chennai, there is Bangalore, there is Trivandrum. So,
and we are drawing the railway map. So, let us say there is, so hermandabad,
there is a railroad between hermandabad and Delhi. So, I will put a line like that. But if there is
a route from hermandabad to Delhi, then it is also a route from Delhi to hermandabad. So, if I put a
line like this, it is obvious that there is another line coming back. There is a route,
there is a route both ways. So, if A, D belongs to the edge set, it is already implied, it already
means that D, A belongs to the edge set. There is always, if there is a edge from U to V,
there is another edge from V to U. So, this pairs is called a edge in the graph,
it corresponds to one line. So, in a railway network, it does not mean to have this arrow
hertz because it is obvious that if there is a edge from A to B, there is always a edge from
B to V. And this type of relations, we had a name, that is, it is a symmetric relation. So,
the relation underlying the graph, if it is symmetric, that is, if U, V belongs to the
relation, V U also belongs to the relation, then in the picture, we do not need to put this arrow
marks. And such a relation is called a undirected, such a graph corresponding symmetric relation
is called a undirected graph. So, let us say this is the railway map, railway map. So, this is the
railway graph. So, we do not need to put this arrow marks. In fact, we do not need to put both
the edges. You only need to put A to D, that implies that there is a D to A. And maybe there
is things like this. So, maybe the map looks like this. I am just giving an example. So,
such graphs are called undirected graphs. And there are several examples. For example,
there is, you have your network, let us say LAN network. So, you have a LAN network. So,
typically in a local LAN network, you have a connectivity from every vertex. So, you have,
I mean, you will have individual terminals. You might have a router. And the routers might be
connected to other routers. And you might have connection to others. And if there is a connection,
there is a connection which is both ways. So, that is a LAN network. Of course, you can configure
routers as only one way communication. But assume that is not the case. It is undirected. So, those
are called undirected graphs. So, in undirected graphs, so let us look at this particular graph.
So, what is the vertex set here? The vertex set are the spaces. So, there is Delhi, Kolkata,
Ahmedabad, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Bangalore, Trivandrum, Chennai. So, that is the vertex set. And what is
the edge set? So, when you have a directed graph, so there is actually edge A, D and D, A. So,
edge set consists of ordered tuples. It is a sequence of length 2, each element is. But
when you have A, D, it is understood that there is D, A. So, instead of putting order tuple,
we can put a set of size 2. So, when you have undirected graph, it is a set of subsets of
vertices of size 2. The edge set are basically sets. So, there is D, K, there is A, M. You do
not need to specify an order, M, edge and so on. So, the edge set in undirected graphs,
the each element, each edge is a set of size 2 of the vertex set, because you do not need
to specify the. So, every undirected graph is also a directed graph by like. So, take the set
and make, add a 2 tuples, A, D and D, A. You will make it in a directed graph. So, that, so also let
us look at the adjacency matrix of a directed graph. So, if you have a undirected graph,
sorry adjacency matrix of a undirected graph. So, adjacency matrix of undirected graph. So,
how does it look like? So, yeah. So, the thing is if there is a edge from a particular vertex
to another vertex, there is also edge from that vertex back to original vertex. So, actually
if you look at it, yeah. So, let us say I mean you have, yeah. Let us give one example. So,
let us say you have 1, 2, 3, 4 and let us say you have undirected graph like this.
This is undirected graph. So, you have 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4, yeah. 1 to 2 there is a edge,
1 to 1 there is no edge, yeah. So, 2 to 4 and yeah. So, yeah. So, remember that there is yeah,
1 to 2 edge is there. So, 2 to 1 edge is also there, yeah. And there is a edge to 3 and 4,
yeah. 3 has a edge only to 2 and 4, yeah. And 4 has a edge only to 2 and 3, yeah. So,
note that, yeah, the matrix, yeah. If you look at these entries, the top entries, they
completely differ. So, if you look at these bottom entries and those top entries, yeah,
they have to be exactly the same. They have to be symmetric, yeah. So, yeah. So, you strictly
speaking when you have a mean directed graph, you only need to specify the upper triangular
portion of it, yeah. And the lower triangular part is exactly the same, yeah. So, finally,
we will come to one more type of graph called bipartite graph. So, what is a bipartite graph,
yeah. So, we will see again an example, yeah. Suppose, you have a like yeah,
a marriage website, it is a matchmaking website, yeah. So, in a matchmaking website, yeah,
again you can have something like a social network, yeah. But here the vertex at V, yeah,
is partitioned into two different set, yeah. So, the vertex at V is consist of a set of
U and a set of W, where U is the men users, yeah, and W is the women users, yeah. So,
you in a, yeah. And when do you put a edge, yeah. So, yeah, there are actually two type of edges,
yeah. So, you can have, yeah. So, you can have, yeah. So, there is, yeah. So, there is actually
mean two bipartite graphs in such a setting, yeah. So, the men specify, yeah. So, let us say there
is, yeah. So, the men specify, yeah, the women they like. And let us say there is some, yeah,
preference like this. And then, so, this is U and this is W. And yeah, there again there is a
preference list for the women also, yeah. And possibly what the, yeah, the website is trying
to do is if there is a, yeah, arrow both ways, yeah, between people and they try to find a match,
yeah. So, yeah, in this kind of graph, so, actually there are, you know, let us look at
only one part of it, only the, let us say, women's preferences or only the men's preferences, yeah.
So, these, yeah, this kind of graph, the vertex set has two parts, yeah. And your edge set consists
of only edges from the first part to the second part, yeah. So, U, V, U, W belongs to the edge,
yeah, only if U belongs to U and W belongs to W, you know. There are only edges from one set to
another set, yeah, assuming we are only interested in that kind of relations, okay. So, yeah, I mean
just an example, yeah. So, if you take the, let us look at the adjacency matrix of this graph,
yeah. So, you have, yeah. So, let us say, I will note down all the U vertices in the top side,
yeah. Let us say, this is A, B, C, D and this is 1, 2, 3, 4 and this is, yeah. So, there is one more,
yeah. And there is again A, B, C, D and, okay, sorry. So, vertices of W is 1, 2, 3, 4 and this is A,
B, C, D, yeah. So, you will have, yeah, A, B, C, D here, yeah, 1, 2, 3, 4. Again, this is U and this
is W. So, A, B, C, D here, 1, 2, 3, 4 here, yeah. And note that all the edges are going from U to W,
yeah. So, there is no edges going from U to U. So, this entire part of the matrix would be 0,
yeah. Similarly, there is no edge going from W to W. So, this entire part would be 0, yeah.
And yeah. So, from A to W, there is a edge, yeah. So, from A to 1 and 2, there is a edge. So,
there is 1, 1 here, yeah, and 0, 0 here, yeah. And B, there is only edge to 3, yeah. And yeah,
from C, there is a edge to 2 and 4, yeah. And from D, there is only edge to 4, yeah. And similarly,
the edge from W to, I mean, U can be expressed here, right. So, from 1, there is a edge to A
and C, yeah. From 2, there is a edge to B and D, yeah. From 3, there is a edge to A and D.
And from 4, there is a edge to B and D, yeah. So, that is the adjacency matrix of the bipartite
graph. So, there is 2 huge blocks of zeros there, yeah, which you can ignore, yeah, okay. So,
that is all for this part of the video. So, what all did we cover? So, we covered, yeah,
what is graphs, which is just another name for regulation. We saw few examples of a graph,
which is the WWW graph or the social network graphs, yeah. We looked at different types
of graphs, the directed graph, undirected graph and finally, the bipartite graph, yeah.
That is all. Thank you.
