So, good. So, since we have seen random variables and we have explained what distributions mean.
So, let us look at some examples of distributions. So, now, we are going to introduce you to
terminologies of how certain random variables behave. So, here we have discussed something
called indicator random variables or Bernoulli random variables. A random variable X is
called an indicator random variable if with probability p for some p it is 1 and it is
0 with probability 1 minus p right. So, now, this was used in example where you are interested
in success of an experiment right. So, a trial could succeed with probability p and fail
with probability 1 minus p right. So, this is what we call an indicator random variable
or a Bernoulli random variable right. So, now, what we will do in this lecture is we
will look at random variables and say oh if this random variable has a certain behavior
then we will call it as a particular name. Here this random variable X that we have defined
here has an indicative nature and we will call this a Bernoulli random variable or an
indicator random variable right. So, its purpose is to indicate some event right. So, Bernoulli
after the mathematician Bernoulli right and then. So, this random variable if you stare
at it its expectation is nothing, but it is equal to the probability that X is equal to
in which case it is p right and what is the variance of this random variable. So, let
us compute X square. So, what is this? It is nothing, but. So, what is it going to be?
It is going to be p right. So, it takes value look at X square. So, it is going to be identical
with probability p 0 with probability 1 minus p right. So, now, I have expectation of X
square also equal to p and then what would happen? So, what is the variance of this random
variable? So, it is going to be p minus p square this is nothing, but p times 1 minus
p right. This is a behavior of this random variable. So, now. So, standard deviation
of this random variable is going to be root of variance right and is going to be root
of p times 1 minus p good. So, this is your indicator or Bernoulli random variable right.
So, we can ask the next question. So, one of the examples that we have seen is suppose
I have k trials. So, what is the probability that I of them succeed? So, this is another
thing that we have seen. So, what is this? So, let us for the sake of clarity instead
of k we will use n right. So, X is a random variable that denotes the number of successes
in n trials right and probability that this random variable takes a value i is given
by n choose i times p to the i times 1 minus p to the n minus i right. So, this is a probability
a term in your binomial expansion of 1 plus sorry it is in the binomial expression of
p plus 1 minus p to the power of n right. Suppose I take this binomial expansion. So,
this is the ith term in that binomial expansion and which is why the variables the random
variables which are distributed in such a form they are called what are called a binomial
random variables right. So, now what do we have here? I have expectation
of X if you have computed last time. So, what was it? It was summation over all possible
values of i let us say greater than equal to 0 I have n choose i times p to the i times
1 minus p to the n minus i. So, ideally I was supposed to write a limit for the summation
I would have said n, but so note that a choose b for all b greater than a is 0 right. So,
which is why I have been slightly relaxed about writing that, but if you wanted we can
write it. So, expect sorry this is going to be i times
here. So, this times i. So, now, so what is this part? So, this part is a probability
that X is equal to i and this is the value right. So, this entire expression turns out
to be i times probability that good right. So, now, what is this? This summation over
i is equal to 0 to n I have n factorial by n minus i factorial times i factorial. So,
the top I have p to the i times 1 minus p to the n minus i. So, I just take n out and
p out and what I would be left with i is equal to 0 to n I have n choose. So, what can I
have? I have n minus 1 choose i minus 1. So, what do I get? So, I have out of n factorial
I will take 1 n. So, I am going to write as n minus i factorial times i factorial. So,
this is nothing but n minus 1 factorial times n divided by n minus i factorial times i minus
i. So, this i cancels this i and then this n we are going to take it out and then for
the rest of it what I am going to write it as is p to the i minus 1 times 1 minus p to
the n minus i right. So, now, I can write this n minus i you can write it as this part
as 1 minus p to the n minus 1 minus i minus 1 right. So, what I would have here is nothing
but n times p times p plus 1 minus p whole to the n minus 1 right and this value is nothing
but n p. So, this is my expectation of this binomial random variable. Now, I ask you what
is going to be the variance. So, what is the variance? So, variance is going to be expectation
of x square minus expectation of x the whole square right. So, what is expectation of x
square? So, this is going to be summation of i greater than equal to 0 I have i square
times probability that I have n choose i times p to the i minus 1 sorry p to the i times
1 minus p to the n minus i. So, now, based on the simplification I have
given below above. So, can you actually try to find a simplification for this right. So,
I will discuss this in the tutorial. So, please try to find a simplification for this if you
can no pressure right and then correspondingly I can compute exponential. So, this is well
expectation of x whole square good. So, let us work out an example for this binomial random
variable which is different from what you have seen so far right.
Suppose a player is allowed to bet on numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 right and the game is
by the game is decided by 3 dice 3 6 sided dice where each side is equally likely for
each of these dice 3 dice 3 dice 6 face dice such that player wins i dollars i dollars
if the number he bet on appears i times for i in 1, 2, 3. So, that is so let us say player
bets on number 4 right and the dice is rolled. So, now, if one of the face exactly one of
the one of the dice out of the 3 dice shows the number 4 and the other two show different
numbers then the player wins 1 dollar. So, let us sorry player wins 1 dollar yes and
then if this number shows up on 2 dice then the player wins 2 dollars and if the number
shows shows up on 3 dice the player wins 3 dollars or player loses rather else player
1 dollar right. So, to tell you the problem again so player is allowed to bet on 6 numbers
right and his fate is decided by 3 dice. So, now, you roll 3 dice independently. So, now,
you check if the number appears on any of them if the number does not appear on any
of these dice then the player loses a dollar. On the other hand if the number appears on at
least 1 dice he is he stands ground to make some money. So, if the number appears on 1 dice then
he gets 1 dollar if it appears on 2 dice he gets 2 dollars if it appears on 3 dice he gets 3 dollars
right. So, this is the game now we ask what is the expected winning of this person
right. So, now, let us define a random variable x to be the number of faces
the number
picked by the person appears.
So, now, x can take values. So, it can take values from either 0 1 2 or 3 or the other
way to define this is I can say. So, since we are interested in the expected number of
the expected amount of money he makes or loses. So, let us define a random variable y which is
nothing but the amount of money player makes or loses right. So, the so, this random variable
can take values minus 1 1 2 and 3 right. So, these are these 4 numbers.
So, for this what do you have? So, probability that y is equal to minus 1. So, what is this?
So, out of the 3 dice the value appears nowhere. So, this is equivalent to situation saying
probability x is equal to 0 right and what is this? This is 3 choose 0 times. So, what like
the number appears nowhere right. So, it will be 5 by 6 to the 3 right and then probability that
y is equal to 1. So, it is going to be correspondingly probability of x is equal to 1. So, it is going to
be 3 choose 1 times 1 by 6 times 5 by 6 2 right. So, in short probability y is equal to i is nothing
but 3 choose i times sorry probability. So, this is for all i not equal to 0 and i is in 1 2 3.
So, I have 3 choose i times 1 by 6 to the i times 5 by 6 to the 3 minus i. So, this term holds for
i is equal to 0 as well, but it does not make sense for me to say y is equal to 0 right good.
So, what do I get? So, if I compute these values. So, what I get the values to be is I would get
for y is equal to 0 sorry y is equal to minus 1 I have 125 by 216 for y is equal to 1 I have 75 by
216 then for y is equal to 2 I have 15 by 216 and for the rest I have 1 by 216 right.
So, now, the expected value of y is going to be minus 1 times 125 by 216 plus 75 by 216 plus 2
into 15 divided by 216 plus 3 divided by 216 and this entire value sums up to be minus 7 by 216
right. So, this game is not in the favor of the player the player is expected to lose money
right. So, this question could be phrased as rather than asking what is the expected amount
of money that the player makes I could actually ask is the game fair for the player or not.
So, now, the other way to think about this game is if the expectation is positive then the game
is fair to the player and the expectation is negative then the game is not fair for the player
right. So, in most of the games if the expectation is positive towards the player
then it is not fair for the company that is running the game and if the expectation is
negative for the player then it is not fair for the player themselves right good.
So, let us see something called a Poisson distribution right now or a Poisson random variable.
So, the pronunciation of this could be anywhere between Poisson or Poisson depending on where
you come from. So, I am going to I am not going to delve too much into this Poisson random variable,
but I just want to tell you what it is. So, the for the Poisson random variable x
the probability that x is equal to i is given by e to the minus lambda times lambda to the i
by i factorial for a parameter lambda right. So, what is known here is that.
So, Poisson random variables approximate binomials,
binomial distributions when lambda is equal to n p, n is large, n is very large
and lambda is what is called a reasonable quantity or a moderate quantity right.
So, I am not going to go into much details, but for such a distribution the expectation
of this random variable is going to be equal to lambda right. So, for now this is out of the
scope of our syllabus for this course, but it is good to know that there exists something called
a Poisson random variable which approximates binomial distribution as n grows very large
right and lambda is moderate. So, in other words when you have lambda is n times p.
So, your probability if it is too small and n is very large then lambda tends to be
moderate right good. So, the approximation can be seen
by do taking this x equal to i. So, let us say limit or n tends to infinity
look at this quantity which is nothing but limit n tends to infinity of n choose i times
p to the i times 1 minus p to the n minus i. So, here we can substitute p with lambda by n
and then using the limits you will end up with e to the minus lambda times lambda to the i by
i factorial right. As I said this part is kind of good to know, but we will not delve on this much
deeper right good. Then we will go to something called a geometric random variable.
Right. So, one of the examples that we have seen is what are the expected number of trials
to see a success right. So, now we are interested in.
So, x is a random variable where which denotes the number of trials needed
to see a success. So, for example, like one of the examples that we have done is suppose
I have a coin toss right how many trials do we need to see a heads for the first time right.
So, though x is a random variable and let us say for the each of each of these trials
is actually a Bernoulli trial. So, we are interested in the number of Bernoulli trials
that are that are needed to see a success right. So, what is this probability that x is equal to
i for a value i is going to be. So, 1 minus p to the i minus 1 times p right. So, if for all of
these random variables that we have seen in the last few examples they actually their support is
in the natural numbers right. So, now we have probability that x is equal to i is this right.
So, what is the expectation? The expectation of this quantity is summation i times 1 minus p
to the i minus 1 times p right and this value turns out to be 1 by p right good. So,
one way to infer this is through what is called probability x greater than equal to k for some k.
So, what is this going to be? This is going to be probability of
probability of x equal to k plus probability of x equal to k plus 1 and so on. In other words,
it is nothing but probability that x is equal to i for all i greater than equal to k right.
So, let us compute that. So, probability of x greater than equal to k is given by
summation over i greater than equal to k. So, what is probability of x is equal to i? It is
going to be 1 minus. So, this right and what is this? I am going to take p common.
What do I have? I have. So, 1 minus p to the i minus 1
right. So, this is an infinite summation. So, I can further take p 1 minus p to the i minus 1
out common and then what do I have here? 1 plus 1 minus p and so on and this is an infinite series.
So, it is going to be sum of geometric progression where I have p times 1 minus p
times 1 by 1 minus 1 minus p and this is equal to 1 minus p sorry here this starting from k right.
So, this is going to be
k k 1 minus p to the k minus 1 right good. So, now,
expectation of this random variable x is given by summation of i times probability that
x is equal to i for i greater than equal to 0.
The funny part is this is actually equal to for all i greater than equal to 0
probability that x is greater than equal to i.
This is a very funny thing in the sense that. So, what does it mean? So, I am going to write
probability of x greater than equal to 1 right. So, what is this going to be? Probability of x
is equal to 1 plus probability of x is equal to 2 and so on until the end. Then I write probability
of x greater than equal to 2. So, I have nothing here then I have probability of x equal to 2
plus so on. Now, I write probability of x greater than equal to 3
and I have probability of x greater than equal to sorry probability of x
equal to 3 and so on right and if you actually sum it up. So, on left side
on my left side here what I would get here is summation i greater than equal to 0
probability of let us say probability of i greater than equal to 1 because in this case
0 does not make sense right. This is the same as summation i times probability that x is equal to i.
So, if you look at it in column wise. So, 1 is added only once here 2 is added twice
here 3 is added thrice and so on right. So, if you write this so you are taking a
summation of all of these and you are taking a summation of all of these right.
So, we get that the quantity on the left is sufficient to look at expectation of x right.
So, what do I have here? So, let us say right. So, this is also I will say 1.
So, this is nothing but summation i greater than equal to 1 I have 1 minus p to the k minus 1
sorry i minus 1 right and this being an infinite series what I would get is 1 minus sorry 1 by 1
minus 1 by p sorry 1 by 1 minus 1 minus p. So, this is nothing but 1 by p good.
So, now, for a variable which is geometrically distributed
their expectation is given by 1 by p. So, now, for this random variable x which is
geometrically distributed expectation of x is 1 by p. Now, I ask you what is the variance
right. So, try to work out the variance for this. So, for that what I would need is expectation of
x square right. So, what is this? This is going to be i square times p of x is equal to i.
So, this turns out to be slightly more complicated. I will give you a notes later
right. So, this is a summation of i greater than equal to 0 right good.
So, now, let us see another example for this problem.
Suppose, I have n white balls and m black balls. So, balls are drawn
from the set with replacement until a black ball is seen or black ball is drawn.
Right and now, we ask what is the expected number of ball draws that we need to do
right. I can define my random variable x to be number of draws
until a black ball is seen
or a black ball is drawn right. So, now, what is this? So, probability that x is equal to
some number n is. So, how many black balls do I have? I have m black balls and I have n white
balls and here we are actually drawing with replacements. So, at any point of time before
a draw there are m plus n balls right total of m plus n and every time a white ball is drawn
and this happens for n minus 1 events and then at the end in the nth draw
I pick a black ball right. So, this is going to be m times n to the n minus 1 divided by
m plus n to the n right. So, this is what we have.
So, now, we ask what is the probability that x is greater than some value k
right. So, this is again I do summation over summation over say let us say n
greater than equal to k I have probability of x is equal to n is nothing but summation of
n greater than equal to k m times n to the n minus 1 by m plus n to the n right.
So, I can either work through this laboriously or I apply the formula that I have before that
I obtained before. So, which is this right. So, this is going to be. So, what is it is going to be
n sorry m divided by m plus n whole. So, what do we have we wanted 1 minus p right. So,
1 minus p should be m n to the k minus 1. So, this is what we have right good.
So, implicitly what we are doing is we are using the that sum of geometric progressions
right. So, here it is geometric because
the sum of geometric progressions is implicit in each of the computations that you have done
in these places right. So, there is a sum of geometric progressions very implicit in
most of these computations.
