So, let us go a bit further than the geometric distribution. So, what we ask is, so we want
to see or we want to know the number of expected trials
before we see our successes. Suppose, you are running an experiment, right and you want
to know the number of trials that you need to do to finally, see our successes. So, what
we have computed before was, we wanted to see only one success, right. We extend this
a bit further to ask, what is the number of trials that we need to do to see our successes,
right. So, now, X denotes a random variable. The random variable or let us denotes is a
random variable that denotes the number of trials to see our successes, right.
So, now, let us compute this value probability X is equal to n. So, you want to say that
have n trials and the nth step you see the rth success, right. So, if you see our successes
before n, you do not have to go to the n itself, right. So, it has to be that the nth trial
is where you get the rth success, right and before that you have n minus 1 previous trials.
Under the n minus 1 previous trials, you would have r interspersed somewhere in between,
right. So, I have n trials out of which r are successful and n minus r, r fails, right
and we have this additional criteria that the rth success only happens at the nth step.
So, this r minus 1 other successes would be interspersed between the n minus 1 locations.
So, towards this what I would write here is I would say I will pick location of r minus
1 in n minus 1 trials, right and my final trial is fixed. So, it is going to be 1 choose
n, right and I have r successes and n minus r failures, right. So, this is a random variable
x that is denotes the number of trials needed to see r successes, right and then if I actually
write it as expectation of x. So, it is going to be summation over n minus
n greater than equal to 0 rather n greater than equal to 1. It does not make sense to
say n greater than equal to 1 because you need at least r trials to see r successes.
So, I will say n greater than equal to r times n times probability of x is equal to n and
this is nothing but summation of n greater than equal to r n times n minus 1 choose r
minus 1 times p to the r times 1 minus p to the n minus r, right and this value actually
comes out to be r by p, right. So, I will skip the derivation for a bit, but this is
what it turns out to be.
So, let us look at an example. So, let us say we are interested in. So, what is the
probability of r successes before m failures? So, this is a twist on the above problem.
So, what we said is previously what we computed was the probability of r successes and trials.
Now, we just twist it a bit and say what is the probability of the r successes before
m failures, right. So, what could be the way here?
So, what are we interested in? We are interested in the rth success should happen before r
plus m minus 1th trial, right. So, if n is equal to r plus m minus 1th trial, right.
If n naught then m failures would have happened. So, now, if I have r successes and m failures
then the total number of trials would be r plus m. Rather if I have a successes and b
failures then the total number of trials is going to be a plus b.
So, if I cross r plus m. So, there is a possibility that I have more than m failures greater than
equal to m failures, right. So, now what this says is my rth success should happen before
the r plus m r plus m minus 1th trial. That is my rth trial could have rth success could
happen anywhere between rth location rth trial and r plus m minus 1th trial, right. It can
be this, it can be this and so on until this. So, in other words what I want is I want a
summation from n is equal to r till r plus m minus 1 of this probability of m failures
probability as I described above, right. So, this is the probability that I have described
here. So, that is what I want. So, it is going to be summation of m minus 1 choose r minus
1 times p to the r times 1 minus p to the n minus r, right. So, this gives me the probability
of r successes before m failures. So, now, this kind of random this kind of random variables
and the corresponding distribution are what are called negative binomial distributions.
So, this is the distribution which is called negative binomial distribution, right. I will
not spend too much time into why it is called negative binomial distribution because the
reason seems very vague to me, right. So, one idea of why that could happen could
be obtained by expanding this term and the way to get this, right good. So, then the
other distribution that you want to look at is what is called a hyper geometric distribution.
So, now, so what is this? So, let us say my random variable is of the form probability
that x is equal to i is m choose i times n minus m choose n minus i sorry yeah. So, n
minus i. So, right. So, this is what I have. So, one instantiation could be suppose I am
choosing n objects out of capital N many objects, capital N many objects out of capital N many
objects such that m out of n objects are special, right. My random variable x is denotes
rather it is corresponding to rather it denotes
the number of special objects picked, right. So, the number of special objects picked
right. So, this is the this is something which you have seen before. For example, we had
a bag of red balls and blue balls. So, let us say I have or red balls and white balls
in our questions. So, question is suppose we have a bag of red balls and blue balls
with bag with r red balls and w white balls, right. So, and we pick n balls from it. So,
what is the probability that a bag of red balls with bag with r red balls with r red
balls at least r sorry at least i red balls are picked, right. So, this probability is
going to be probability that x is equal to i. So, what is x? x denotes the minimum number
of red balls being picked and this is given by. So, I have r choose i and then I have
how many do I have r plus w minus i many balls and I pick n minus i from the rest of them.
So, what is this say? The first term tells us that I need to pick i red balls regardless.
From the rest of the balls I can pick red balls or white balls, right. So, here i the
minimum quantity is taken care of already. Then here the rest of the quantity is coming
from the rest of the r plus w minus i balls, right. So, this is going to give me a probability
that at least i balls are picked, right. Here this random variable x is saying the it is
saying the minimum number of red balls that need to be picked, right.
So, then the other concept that we need to discuss is the expectation and variance of
sums of Bernoulli random variables, right. So, now, so, sums of independent Bernoulli
random variables to be more precise. So, I have x 1, x 2 and so on to x n where each
of a each of which is a Bernoulli random variable. And then x is summation of each of these
random variables, right. So, what I am interested in? I am interested in expectation of x and
by linear to expectation, this is given by 1 till n expectation of x i. So, this is the
sum of x 1, x 2 and so on to x n where each of a each of which is a Bernoulli random variable
and then x is summation of each of these random variables, right.
So, what I am interested? I am interested in expectation of x and by linear to expectation
right. So, this is just linear to expectation. So, now, for variance for variance what we
are interested in is the x the computation of expectation of x squared, right. So, what
is this? The other way to write this is expectation of summation x i, i is equal to 1 till n times
summation of. So, let us say j is equal to 1 till n x j, right. So, this I can write
it as expectation of summation of i is equal to 1 till n x i times summation of x j where
j goes from 1 till n. And this can further be written as expectation
of summation of x i squared where i goes from 1 till n plus expectation of x i is equal
times x j. So, let me just say summation of these summation of i comma j where i is not
equal to j. So, this is between 1 to n. So, again applying linear to expectation what
I would get is summation of i is equal to 1 till n expectation of x i squared where
i is not equal to j plus expectation of summation i comma j where i is not equal to j x i times
x j, right. So, now, the variance happens to be the variance
of this random variables is going to be summation of x is expectation of x squared minus expectation
of x the whole squared, right. And this is nothing but summation of i is equal to 1 till
n. So, what is this quantity? This is going to be summation of expectation of x i the
whole squared. So, what is this quantity? This quantity is again summation of i is equal
to 1 till n I have expectation of x i the whole squared sorry x i x i squared plus summation
i comma j 1 till n i not equal to j I have expectations of x i times expectation of x
j, right. So, putting it all together what I would get
here is. So, I would have expectation of x squared sorry x i squared i is 1 till n minus
expectation of x i squared plus summation i comma j within 1 till n expectation of x
i squared minus expectation of x i squared i is 1 till n minus expectation of x i squared
x j minus here i not equal to j expectation of x i times expectation of x j, right. So,
now, if random variables x i and x j. So, if you are actually taking x i is to be independent
Bernoulli random variables then each of these quantities is going to be 0 I mean. So, this
quantity is going to be 0, right. So, why is that? So, this quantity can be written
as expectation of x i times expectation of x j if they are independent, right and this
quantity is the same as this quantity. So, this quantity disappears and in which case
you can write it as. So, I can write a summation of i is equal to 1 till n variance of x i
plus summation of i comma j i not equal to j expectation of x i x j minus expectation
of x i times expectation of x j. So, this expression that we have derived here is the
it holds for every random variables random variable x that is the summation of some other
random variables x i's, right. So, what inference that we get is if x 1 till x n are independent
we get variance of x or variance of summation x i is given by summation of variances of
x i, right. So, this is a very interesting fact to know and keep in mind, good.
So, in case there x i's are Bernoulli random variables and indicator random variables of
independent trials then what we have is variance of the summation is equal to variance of the
sum of variance of individual random variables x i.
