So, welcome back. So, what have we seen so far? So, we have seen the notion of random
variables. So, we will use a notation r dot v for short hand, right. So, what are random
variables? Random variables were functions from my sample space to real numbers, right.
And then what we saw was expectation of random variables. So, what is expectation? So, expectation
was expectation of a random variable X is summation over all v belong to the range of
X v times probability that X is equal to v. So, these are expectation, right. So, range
of a random variable or in short r of X is all possible values the random variable X
takes, right. And this range is sometimes also referred to as support of the random
variable, good. And so, this is what is called a probability mass function.
So, for range r X. So, what we have is for all v belong to r of X probability of X is
equal to v, this will sum up to 1, this entire quantity sums up to 1. So, this is what we
have seen so far. And last time we have seen examples of how to compute expectations. And
towards the end of the last lecture what we were trying to wonder was how does the random
variable X behave with respect to expectation. So, given an expectation how is my random
variable deviating from this? So, for example, I have a random variable X which is given
by 1 with probability 1 by 3, I have a random like it takes a 0 with probability 1 by 3
and minus 1 with probability 1 by 3, right. So, random variable is given by some random
process. There is an expectation of this random variable is a fixed value, right. Once you
apply expectation on this random variable, it ceases to be random, it becomes fixed,
right. So, now, what is the expectation of this random variable? Expectation of this
random variable is going to be 1 times 1 by 3 plus 0 times 1 by 3 plus minus 1 times 1
by 3 and the answer happens to be 0, right. So, this random variable has an expectation
of 0, good. So, now, so, we look at another random variable Y which is 1 with probability,
so, this probability is going to be 2 by 5, 0 with probability 1 by 5 and minus 1 with
probability 2 by 5. So, even in this particular random variable the expectation is 0, right.
So, these are two different random variables which have the same expectation, right. So,
now, we would also like to understand how the random variable behaves with respect to
expectation. Last time we saw something called a Markov inequality which said probability
of a random variable being a value greater than a is at most, right. So, this was what
is Markov inequality. So, this time what we are interested in is what is this value? So,
this is my expectation and this quantity as a whole this is deviation from my expectation,
right. So, as you will soon see like this value is related to our standard deviation,
right. So, what is this value? If I just computed this way, so, I can define this to be a random
variable Z, right. So, like amidst all of this what we have been implicitly doing is
suppose I have a random variable X, I can define a random variable Y which can be written
as AX plus B where A and B are constants. Now, expectation of Y is going to be A times
expectation of X plus B, right. So, similarly here what I would have is expectation of Z
is nothing but expectation of X minus expectation of expectation of X. So, as I said expectation
of a fixed quantity is itself. So, if you want to say that like you know I have a value
V and what is expectation? A fixed value, it is going to be the value itself because
it is the value with probability 1 and so, it does not make sense to say expectation
of expectation is some random value. So, it is a fixed value. So, expectation of expectation
is nothing but the expectation itself. So, expectation of a fixed value V is V itself.
If V is fixed that is V is not random variable, right and this quantity is 0. So, now, this
actually makes our life slightly difficult that we are not able to understand this value.
So, one way to deal with this is we would like to understand the expectation of this
value. So, that is we are interested in the magnitude of deviation, right. So, now, the
other way to interpret this is I have an expectation and whatever is deviation on this side is
being cancelled by the deviation on this side, right. So, now, it does not make sense
to study this cumulatively, but let us study this as an absolute value.
So, what I have here is I have expectation of the magnitude, but then so, how do I write
So this is I need to figure out what are the all possible values my random variable X can
take with respect to expectation and take the absolute value, right. There is another
way to deal with this. So, I can actually work with
and this is equal to expectation of X minus expectation of X whole square. So, in literature
when people actually write expectation sometimes they also use this notation which is mu, mu
of X or mu itself. So, when the context is very clear that you are only dealing with
a random variable X people just drop the subscript and just say mu, right. So, mu is a notation
for an expectation or an average or a mean. So, now, what is this quantity I have expectation
of X square minus 2 times X times expectation of X plus expectation of X the whole square,
right. And if I open this up what I would get is expectation of X square. So, I am using
expectation over here. So, I get 2 times. So, as I said expectation of X is already
a value. So, applying expectation on it does not really help. So, it is going to be expectation
of X times expectation of X plus expectation of X.
So, now, the first expectation of X could come from this and the second expectation
of X comes from. So, both of these together contribute to this, right. And this will give
us expectation of X square minus expectation of X the whole square. And this is a parameter
that we will call variance. So, as we define. So, we will define something called variance.
So, variance is variance of a random variable will short end notation will define it as
var of X is given by expectation of X minus. So, mu the whole square or equivalently this
of X. And this is equal to expectation of X square minus mu square or expectation of
X square minus expectation of X the whole square, right. So, this is what we have so
far. So, let us apply this to the random variables that we have.
So, now, I have a random variable X which was 1 with probability 1 by 3, 0 with probability
1 by 3 and minus 1 with probability 1 by 3. And then I have a random variable Y which
is given by 1 with probability 2 by 5, 0 with probability 1 by 5 and minus 1 with
probability 2 by 5, right. So, in this case the expectation of X is 0 and expectation
of Y is 0. Now, I have I want to compute expectation
of X square. So, what is this? X square takes the values 1 with probabilities. So, what
is the probability? So, X square is 1 for both of these cases. So, cumulatively the
probability is 2 by 3 and 0 with probability 1 by 3. And for Y square it is 1 with probability
4 by 5 and then 0 with probability 1 by 5, right. So, that is what we have.
Now, variance of X here. So, variance of X is given by expectation of X square minus
expectation of X the whole square. And what is expectation of X square? So, it is going
to be 2 by 3 into 1 plus 1 by 3 into 0 minus what is expectation here? 0 square. So, this
is nothing but 2 by 3. On the other hand variance of Y is. So, I am just going to write it as
4 by 5 into 1 plus 0 into 1 by 5 minus 0 square. So, this value is 4 by 5. So, these are two
different random variables and their range is the same. However, the way the probability
mass functions for some of the values are distinct, right rather for all the values
are distinct. Now, even though the mean is the same. So, variance can act as a distinguisher
between both of these distributions, right. So, rather it acts as a distinguisher of these
two random variables and how they are distributed, right.
So, now what I mean by distribution? Here if I have a random variable X, then the way
mass is distributed over each of its values in the range is what is called a distribution,
right. So, now, given a random variable and the corresponding range, right. The set which
is probability X is equal to V for all V belong to the set range of X is my distribution.
The other way to say this is I am going to have V and the corresponding probability X
is equal to V, right. So, this is a formal way of saying for a value V, this is the associated
probability mass, right. And if you have some probability mass at every value, it could
be 0 and it can at most be 1 and we have this that we have this property that the probability
mass over all values in the range should sum up to 1, right. So, distribution is nothing
but the way the probability mass is distributed amongst the values in the range, right. So,
this is what we call a distribution, a distribution of a random variable. So, this is distribution
simply refers to distribution of probability mass amongst the possible values that random
variables can take, good. So, there are two things that you have learnt
so far, one is variance, the other is distribution. So, now, we will actually see the example
where despite having variance and mean being the same rather the variance and expectation
being the same, the way the probabilities are distributed could be different for different
random variables. So, let us take this example where again I
have X is given by it is plus 1 minus 1 with probability half with probability half here
and then I have a random variable Y which is 2 with probability 1 by 8, 0 with probability
3 by 4 and minus 2 with probability 1 by 8, right. So, these are I mean since I have described
it to you explicitly these two are distributions which have various different support rather
than rather we have different ranges and we will see that these two will have the same
mean and same variance. So, just I in this particular random variable
we get the expectation is 0 and again I in this random variable I have expectation of
Y is going to be 0. So, this follows from the previous examples itself and now let us
here. So, the value of X square is 1 with probability 1 and for Y square half with probability
2 by 8 the value becomes 4 and 0 with probability 3 by 4, right. So, now, what is my expectation
of X square? So, this is going to be 1 and in fact, that will go that is going to give
me my variance to be 1 and here the expectation of Y square is going to be. So, it is going
to be 4 into 2 by 8 which is nothing, but 4 into 1 by 4 which is 1 and variance of this
is 1. So, point to take home here is that the behavior
of two different random variables need not be same if their mean and variance are equal,
right. It could so happen that the ranges could be different or there are some things
called the higher order moments which could be different for each of them. So, to put
it simply for the sake of what you call breadth, this expectation of X is the first order moment
and expectation of X square is the second order moment, right and expectation of X minus
mu whole square is the second central moment. It is not important for this course, but it
is good to know. So, there are some things called the moments in you can actually look
for you can ask for expectation of X to the k for some k or you can ask for expectation
of X minus mu the whole to the k, right. Both of these could be asked, good.
So, let us work out another example for the variance. So, this is an example that we have
with so far consider a 6 sided dice, dice where each face is equally likely, right.
Now, that is I can associate a random variable X which takes values rather it takes values
from 1, 2 and 6. So, what we have worked out before was we worked out that the expectation
variable X is given by 1 by 6 into 1 plus and so on until 6 into 1 by 6. So, this value
is 7 by 2. So, now, we will actually compute what is X square. Again this is for the sake
of going from the first principles we will say for all values in the range of X my expectation
of X square is going to be V square times probability that X is equal to V square, right.
So, here I may be making a mistake by writing it this way. So, why is that? I could have
this value V square obtained by two different two different values V. For example, in our
example so far I have minus 1 and 1 both of them contributing to 1. So, I cannot blindly
say V square times probability that X is equal to V square because for minus 1 and 1 both
of the times I would be summing this up. So, this is not a right notion. So, you have to
be careful, right. So, I am just going to erase this. So, then what can I say? I have
1 square which is given by then 2 square into 1 by 6 and so on until 6 square into 1 by
and if you work this out what you would get is it is 91 by 6, right.
And then what is the variance of this random variable? Variance of X is nothing but expectation
of X square minus expectation of X whole square and this is nothing but 91 by 6 minus 7 by
2 the whole square and this value works out to be 35 by 12. Please verify this calculations
later. So, this is what are computation of variances.
