So, now we will start a new section which is linear algebra right. So, what is linear
algebra right? So, here in this section what we are focusing on is the algebraic manipulations
which are linear right. For example, I have 4 x plus 5 y right. So, here x and y are algebraic
objection these are variables and what do I have? I have a linear equation that is the
degrees of each of these variables are at most 1 right. So, what we are interested in
this particular section is to understand linear algebraic transformations right good.
So, now, so let us first study what are called vectors and matrices right. So, in high school
and in other places you would have studied vectors as those objects which are both direction
and magnitude right. So, in high school these are objects that specify or that contain both
direction and magnitude. For example, you would have had vectors from origin let us say. So,
suppose I have my x axis and y axis right. I could have a vector starting from origin
to this place right. So, let this be a vector A and I can have let us say this vector which is B
right. So, what is it contain? So, now, so let us mark it as 1 2 3 5 6 and let us say this is 1 2 3 4 5.
So, this particular point that we have. So, this is what is this point? This is 6 comma 4 and this
particular point that we have is 2 comma 4 right. So, let me take another line which is. So, let me
use another color to describe that. So, as to right. So, I have another line which is
called which I will call it C right. So, now, what do I do? I will make another vector here.
So, this also I will call it C. So, what is the vector here? The vector A defines a line
or a ray from it is not a ray it is a line because we have an end point rays without
here we have 2 end points let us say a line from 0 comma 0 to 6 comma 4 right, but rather
than seeing it as this line we say it is a line in the direction in the direction or
slope or slope. So, what is slope here? So, m is y is equal to m is y by x which is 4
divided by 6 from origin of magnitude. So, what is it root of 4 square plus 6 square
right. So, that is our vector A. Similarly, I have vector B which can be defined. Now,
what do I have here is I would get A is nothing, but B plus C right. So, I go to a. So, what
is B? B is a line from origin with slope. So, it is going to be 4 by sorry 4 by 2 yes
and magnitude which is root of 2 square plus 4 square right. So, now, I can like C is another
line which has slope 0 and it has magnitude this much right. So, this is what we understand
in high school. So, the other way to represent vectors here. So, A can be represented as
it is. So, it is 4 6 B can be represented as vector it is going to be 2 4 right and
what do I have here C? C is a vector which is. So, my right. So, it is other way around.
So, it is 6 and 4 and C is a vector which is given by 4 comma 0 right. If you actually
put them together what do you get? I have 6 4 given by 2 4 plus 4 comma 0 right. So,
what are the properties that are happening here that are being used here? So, let us
So, what is this? A vector for us is a data structure right and it can take a meaning
depending on the context right. In physics and in coordinate geometry for us vector actually
said what is the direction and what is the magnitude right. So, we can use vector to
be anything. So, for us for the sake of this math for CS vector is nothing, but a data
structure with a specified structure right. So, we will say a vector is an array. So,
it is like an array right. So, it has some specified locations and each of the specified
locations carry some value. So, now, a vector V has some sort of a dimension
right. So, the number of coordinates that this vector carries is my dimension of the
vector right. So, to be more precise. So, what is the dimension of a vector? So, it
carries a quantity called dimension of a vector right. So, simply put number of coordinates
it is rather it is at most number of coordinates. So, we will come to the specific nature of
what is the dimension of a vector right and now what else. So, therefore, they have an
additive structure, they follow some nice arithmetic properties right. So, I have a
vector U and I have a vector V, I can add them up right. I will get a new vector which
is given by U plus V. So, this is my notation or I could call this W right. So, I have addition
of vectors is possible right. So, we will also see that multiplication of vectors is
also possible, but we will come to that in a bit.
So, there are specified ways of multiplying vectors and addition is point wise. So, given
a vector A. So, I have a vector A which is given by A 1, A 2 and so on until A n and
have a vector B. So, I can only add vectors which are of the same dimension A 1 plus B
2 and so on until A n plus B n right. So, if I had a vector which is of the form 3,
2, 1 and I had another vector of the form 2, 3, I cannot add them up right. These are
of different dimensions. So, this has 3 coordinates and this has 2 coordinates right. These are
2 incomparable vectors right. So, this cannot be added right.
So, now. So, the examples that we saw above were what are called geometric vectors right.
So, they had a direction that they were specifying a magnitude and it is easy to visualize them
right. You had a 3 dimensional space and you could visualize this vectors or a 2 dimensional
space in our examples right. So, anything beyond 2 dimension or 3 dimensions, we cannot
visualize them so easily right. It is I mean our world is 3 dimensional and even if you
add the another dimension which is the 4th dimension, we cannot visualize it with the
that we have right now right good. So, what we saw there was geometric vectors,
but vectors could be of any kind. So, vectors could be like arrays of elements from real
numbers right. I can have a vector whose entries are real numbers. So, what do you mean by
this notation here is my vector each of its entries takes a real number and the number
of entries are at most I mean the number of entries are exactly n. So, when I actually
say my vector V belongs to R3 that means, I have a vector which has 3 coordinates and
each of its entry takes a real value right. Instead of R, I can actually use some generic
domain D right. So, I have vector in R to the 3 that sorry D to the 3 that means, each
of these entries comes from the domain D. So, here domain right. So, this is our introduction
to vectors. So, what properties do they have? I can multiply a vector with a scalar. So,
that means, A times V I can do this. So, for example, I have 2 3 1 and I am multiplying
this by 5. So, what is this going to be? This is going to be 10, 15 and 5 right. More abstractly
suppose I have a vector V1 is rather A1, A2, A1, A2 and so on until An and I have multiplied
with alpha then what do I get? I get alpha times A1, alpha times A2 and so on. So, at
this point of time I am being very critical in the sense that I am multiplying only on
the left, but on the other hand I can actually multiply it on the right as well and it gives
the same thing right. So, what do I have on the right? So, if I multiply 2 3 1 with 5
then I get the same thing which is 10, 15, 5, but for the sake of generality we will
always multiply a scalar on the left. So, we will see why this is the case pretty soon
right. So, there is no there is no importance of left multiplication or right multiplication
for a vector with a scalar right. So, now, so what we will observe is matrices are generalizations
of vectors right. So, what we had was a structure a data structure which could take values
in a column right. On the other hand I can actually have a matrix which is a n cross
n structure or a m cross n structure where I have m entries sorry n entries per row and
I have m many rows right. Here what I mean by m, m counts the number of rows and n counts
the number of columns right and when n is equal to 1 what we have is a vector.
So, matrix is a one dimensional sorry matrix is a higher dimensional vector right. So,
right. So, now, what do you have? So, let us say I have values a 11, a 12, a 13, b 11,
b 12, b 13, c 11, c 12 sorry c sure right. Then I have a 21, a 22, a 23, b 21, b 22,
b 23, then I have c 21, c 22, c 23. Suppose I have these two matrices and I want to add them
up right. So, I can add them up entry by entry. So, I have a 11 plus a 21, then I have a 12 plus
a 22, I have a 13 plus a 23 and similarly I have b 11 plus b 21, then similarly b 12 plus b 22,
then I have b 13 plus b 23 and then c 11 plus c 21, c 12, then I have c 13 plus c 23. So,
this is my addition of two matrices right and I can also multiply matrix with a constant.
Let us say I have this matrix, let me just copy the one from above. Suppose I have this matrix.
So, what is this going to give me? So, this is going to give me. So, each of this
entry. So, it is going to give me alpha in each of these entries right. So, this is what we have.
So, what we noted before is a vector of dimension N is a matrix of dimension
N cross 1 right. Here I have N rows and 1 column right. So, now, let us multiply two matrices.
Suppose I have these matrices for the sake of a, b, c, d, then I have this another matrix which
is a prime, b prime, c prime, d prime. So, what is that I get? So, the way you multiply two matrices
is you take a row and multiply with the column entry by entry. So, this entry multiplies with
this, this entry multiplies with this right. So, the other way to think about this is what we,
the other way to think about this is what we call inner product rather. So, we will come back to this.
So, let us do this. I have a, a prime plus b, c prime right. Then I have this and this right. So,
I have a, a, b prime plus b, d prime right. And then what do you have here? I have c,
a prime plus d, c prime. Then I have c, b prime plus d, d prime right. So, this is my
matrix multiplication. The way you multiply it is I have this row, then you multiply with this
column and the way you do it is you do. So, think of it as I have a and b, then you have a and c
prime. So, let me not use the vector notation. So, I have a times a, b, then I have a prime,
c prime. So, what you are doing is you are taking a, a prime plus b, c prime right. So,
this is related to something called inner product of vectors right. So, basically what
is the inner product of two vectors? Suppose, I have a vector u which is u 1, u 2 until u n.
And suppose I have a vector v which is v 1, v 2 so on until v n right. The inner product which
is generally represented in this brackets like this or it is represented using u dot v is
summation i goes from 1 till n u i times v i right. And if you look at this matrix multiplication,
what is happening here is. So, we have my row a, b. So, the first entry of my the product matrix
is going to be the inner product of row 1 and column 1 row 1 of the first matrix and
column 1 of the second matrix. And then what do I have here row 1 of the first matrix and
column 2 of the second matrix. And here I have row 2 of the first matrix and column
1 of the second matrix. Then I have row 2 of the first matrix and column 2 of the second matrix.
So, that is my inner product. So, I can treat this row as a vector. So, what I have here is. So,
I have this and this. So, what I am doing is an inner product between the row 1 and column 1,
row 1 of the first matrix and the column 1 of the second matrix. And similarly for the second entry
I have this multiplied with this. So, it is row 1 of the first matrix and column 2 of the second
matrix. And here what I have here is row 2 of the second matrix times column 1 of the first matrix.
This is all inner product. Again what we need here is that for inner product to work both these
vectors have to be of the same dimension. You cannot do an inner product between vectors of
different dimensions. So, that is going to be absurd mathematically. So, we have seen
multiplication of two matrices. Now, I said we were interested in multiplying scalars with the
matrices. So, with vector I can actually think of my scalar to be a vector of rather a matrix
of dimension 1 cross 1. I have a vector like I have this matrix which is A 1, A 2 and so on
till A n. Then this is n cross 1. So, I have to decide whether I do a left multiplication,
right. If I treat them as matrices the only way I can write it as matrix multiplication is as
right multiplication of the constant, right. So, implicitly what is being what is going on
here is I can actually multiply matrices of dimension m cross m and m cross k first. So,
I need the number of columns of my first matrix to be the same as the number of rows of the
second matrix. So, this is implicit in the inner product definition that we have that I can only
look at inner product of vectors of same dimensions, right. So, I need the number of the number of
columns in the first matrix to be equal to the number of rows of the second matrix, right. So,
matrix multiplication can only happen matrices A and B, A and B can only be multiplied if the
number of columns of A is equal to the number of rows of B, right. Here what we have are matrices
A and B and here matrix A is multiplied with matrix B that means the rows of. So, you are
looking at inner products of rows of A with columns of B. So, that means the number of
elements in a row should be equal to the number of elements in a column of B, right. So, the other
way of looking at it is number of elements in a row of A must equal number of elements in a column,
in every column rather. So, instead of A I will say every, here also every column of B, right. Only
then two matrices can be multiplied, right. So, if I have to write my vector A1 till An being
multiplied by a constant, then what is the dimension of this vector? n cross 1 and what
is the dimension of this constant as a matrix? It is 1 cross 1, right. So, a right multiplication
makes sense in the matrix notation, right. So, here this definition does not continue to hold
when you go to the matrices because you can multiply a matrix with a constant, right.
And that, so you cannot multiply a m cross n matrix with a 1 cross n matrix as we have seen
above, right. So, this analogy does not go beyond this vector multiplied by a scalar. For matrices
there is another analogy that we will look at, we will come to that in a bit, right. So,
so the other important point about the matrix multiplication is the matrices A and B are being
multiplied this way, right. Here the order matters. So, AB need not be equal to BA, right. So,
it might so happen that, so if AB equal to BA, then so what is this force? If this is
the case, then number of rows equals of A, sorry of B equals number of columns of A and
from the second part I have number of, so basically number of columns of B equal number
of rows of A, right. So, basically it should be of the form n into
m, then this is A and this should be some m into n and the other way round, right. So,
this is a necessity, right. So, this is a necessary condition to multiply AB and BA,
right. And here, so if this is true then something more holds, but we will come to
that in a bit, right. So, this is a necessary condition. If what I mean here is A and B
are multiplicable and B and A are multiplicable, then this condition has to be true, right.
If AB is equal to BA, lot more things will happen, we will come to that in a bit. So,
the next thing that we will actually talk about is if I have matrices A, B and C, then
I have A, B, C as a product of these three matrices, then let us say I have A which is
of the dimension I1 cross I2, then B has dimension I2 cross I3, then C has dimension I3 cross
I4, right. So, what we observe here is suppose I have
a dimension m cross m of A and m cross n of B, the matrix that we end up getting is of
dimension n cross n. In particular, suppose I have a matrix which is of the dimension
k cross l and the other one is l cross m, then if I multiply these two matrices, the
resulting matrix, the product matrix has dimension k cross m, right. So, again this follows from
the definition that we have. So, we are taking rows of A and multiplying with the columns
in a inner product way, right. So, this is the matrix product definition, right.
So, now the other important thing is what happens if I have a product A, B, C. So, now
I have the product A, B, C, I can multiply first A and B, then I multiply it with C or
this is equivalent to saying I have A, then which is multiplied with the product B, C,
right. So, this is slightly more interesting in the sense that suppose I have A and B being
multiplied first, then what do I get as a product A, B is a matrix of dimension I cross
I3 and this is a matrix which is of a dimension I3 cross I4. If I multiply them both, both
of them together, I have this matrix product which is A, B, C which is of dimension I1
cross I4, right. Instead if I multiply B and C first, I would
have got an B, C which is of dimension I2 cross I4, then I am multiplying with A which
is of dimension I1 cross I2 and then together what I get is A, B, C which is of dimension
I1, I4, right. The interesting property here is what is called the associativity law of
multiplication. So, what I have here is A, B times C is the same as A, B times C, right.
So, there is a very good algorithmic question that is like you know inherent in this. Suppose
I have these 3 matrices A, B and C, what is the optimum order of multiplying these matrices?
So, I can also describe this in a multiple way. So, I have A1, A2 and so on A, K for
some K, right. Each of each has a dimension which is compatible. If I have to get the
product of A1, A2, A3 and so on it will A, K. Now, there is a very interesting algorithmic
question which is what is the right order of multiplying these matrices? It may so happen
that this sequence may be optimal than this sequence, right. So, towards that we ask how
many operations are involved in computing the matrix multiplication, right.
So, if I have to generate matrices A and B, right. So, now, the I, jth entry of this is
given by the inner product of. So, let us write it as the inner product of rho i of
A with column j of B, right. So, what is this? This is nothing but summation over some K
is equal to 1 till the dimension n. So, let us say this is dimension m, let us say. So,
A is dimension n cross m and B is dimension m cross l, right. So, what do I have? I have
summation, the elements of this. So, it is going to be A i, k times B k, j, right. So,
if you concentrate. So, here I am using the notation where my matrix A has entries of
A 1 1, A 1 2 and so on until A 1 m and similarly I have A 2 1, A 2 2 and so on until A 2 m
and similarly the nth row will have A n 1, A n 2 so on until A n m. This is my notation
that I am using. At the same time I have B which is given by B 1 1, B 1 2 and so on
until B 1 l and at the end I have B m 1, B m 2 and so on until B m l. So, this is the
notation I am using. So, if I multiply these two matrices and the i jth entry is going
to be the i th row. So, for example, 2 comma 2 entry is going to be I will take the second
row of A and multiply it with the second column. So, this has m elements and this has m elements,
right. So, I am going to do a inner product of these two and that is going to be my 2
comma 2 entry. So, this is my matrix multiplication. So, if you look at it I have m elements in
the row and m elements in a column. So, I have m multiplications that I am doing. So,
for each entry of the product multiplying this way as shown above
n multiplications, n scalar multiplications and n minus 1 additions. So, I have n elements
and I am adding them together. So, I can do that using n minus 1 additions or I like in
the rough case I can just say n additions. So, the number of operations per entry is
2 n right and there are n square entries. So, rather so, here m right. So, sorry here
this should be m. So, I have 2 at most 2 m operations and the number of entries in the
product are n times l. So, both of them put together what I have is 2 m and l many operations
to compute to compute matrix product. So, each of these operations need not be an atomic
operation here this operation is multiplication of 2 scalars all right. So, but just to give
you are an like you know an idea of the algorithmic task up here is what is the number of operations
that are involved in multiplying 2 matrices. So, we will see like you know if you can optimize
as it turns out this value can be optimized much better value, but we will just push it
into the carpet for now right. So, these are the matrices and vectors right
we have seen elementary operations on matrices and vectors.
