Welcome everyone. So, we come to the fourth lecture and this lecture we will be focusing
on the basics of algorithms. Specifically in this video we will look at what is called
the Euclid's GCD algorithm. So, before we come to that algorithm we need to revise a
few things about numbers that we know. So, we saw in the initial lectures there is a
set of natural numbers denoted by this symbol and this is the set of natural numbers 1,
2, 3, 4, 5 and so on. It is a infinite set. So, you cannot define a size to it is a infinite
set. An important relation of which is defined on this natural numbers is the divisibility
relation. So, what is the divisibility relation? So, natural number A is related to B if A divides
B and this A divides B will be writing very often. So, we will use this notation A divides
B to say the same thing. So, A divides B meaning B is a multiple of A and that is the divisibility
relation. So, let us write down this divisibility relation. So, divisibility relation is a subset
of n cross n and let us write down that the divisibility relation. So, what does it consist
of? So, we know that 1 divides 1. So, 1 1 is there, 1 divides 2, 1 also divides 3. In
fact, 1 divides any natural number. So, you will have first you will have all the natural
numbers. 1 will be divide any of the natural numbers. All those things will be there here.
Then let us come to 2. 2 divides itself. Any number actually divides itself. The next number
that 2 divides is 4. 2 divides 4, 2 divides 6 and so on. Then we will come to 3. So, all
the multiples of 2 will be in this second row. Now, we will come to 3. 3 again divides
itself, 3 divides 6, 3 divides 9 and so on. Then we will come to 4. 4 again divides itself,
4 divides 8, 4 divides 12 and so on. Again, you will have a row corresponding to every
natural number. So, you can think of this as like a matrix. There is a rows and columns.
Rows correspond to every natural numbers. Columns are there and they correspond to multiples
of that particular row, the particular first column, the multiples of it. So, this is the
divisibility relation. So, let us draw the graph of the divisibility relation. So, there
is the node 1, there is the node 2 is there. 1 divides itself. So, we need to put an arrow
mark like that. 1 divides 2. So, we need to put an arrow mark like that and 2 divides
itself. So, we need to put an arrow mark like this. So, then there is 3. 1 divides 3 and
3 divides itself. Then we will come to 4. So, I will write down 4 little bit below here.
1 divides 4. 4 divides itself, but 2 also divides 4. So, you need to put an arrow mark
like that and let us come back to 5. 5 again 1 divides 5 and 5 divides itself. Then let
us come to 6. So, 1 divides 6, 6 divides itself, 3 divides 6, also 2 divides 6. So, 2 also
divides 6. Then let us come to 7. 1 divides 7, 7 divides itself and that is all. And let
us let me just finally, write 8 also and be done with it. So, 1 divides 8, 8 divides itself
and 2 divides 8. And similarly, I can draw it is a infinite graph. There are infinite
number of nodes. We cannot draw everything. So, we will just stop here. So, this is called
the divisibility graph. So, if you look at this relation, every number divides itself.
So, this relation is reflexive. Every number divides itself. So, it is reflexive. Is it
symmetric? 1 divides 2, but 2 does not divide 1. So, it is not symmetric. Is it transitive?
Let us say 2 divides 6, 6 divides 12, then 2 also has to divide 12. So, a divides b that
means b is a multiple of a and c is a multiple of b, then it can also be represented as a
multiple of a. So, it is actually transitive. So, it is a reflexive, non-symmetric, but
transitive relation. So, good. So, we understand this relation.
So, another important thing about divisibility is suppose you have these numbers a and b.
So, let us say a is greater than b and suppose it is 2 numbers. They might not divide each
other, but what you can do is you can write a as a quotient times b plus a remainder where
this q is called the quotient and this r is called the remainder. So, what we will do?
We will divide a by b as much as possible. So, q times b is the largest multiple of b
closest to a and then there is some remainder which you need to add, but the important thing
to notice the remainder is a number between 0 to b. Remainder cannot be greater than b.
Then if the remainder is greater than b, then q b was not the closest multiple of b to a.
So, remainder has to be less than b and this is an important fact. This is an important
that we will use in many algorithms. So, it is good to recall that. So, there is one more
thing that we need to understand which is what is called the prime numbers.
Prime numbers are the set of numbers which is only divisible by 1 and itself. a belong
to natural numbers a is only divisible by 1 and itself. If a is only divisible by 1 and itself,
it is a prime number. So, let us see the prime number in this figure. Strictly speaking 1 is
also a prime number, but typically people do not consider 1 a prime number. So, 2 is a prime
number. The 2 is only divisible by 1 or itself. There is no other incoming arrows to 2. Let us
see 3. What are the incoming arrows to 3? There is a self-loop and there is an arrow coming from
1. So, 3 is a prime number. What about 4? There is an arrow self-loop. There is an arrow coming from
1, but there is also an arrow coming from 2. That means 4 is not a prime number. It can be
divided by something else which is not 1 or itself. 5 has an arrow from 1 as well as only a self-loop.
So, it is a prime number. 6 is not a prime number because 2 and 3 divides it. 7 is a
prime number and 8 is not and so on. So, prime numbers are numbers which is only divisible by
1 and itself and prime numbers is a very like important tool for solving many problems because
of what is called the prime number theorem. What does this theorem say? It says that any number
can be written as a product of prime numbers. Any number can be decomposed into a product
of prime numbers. What that means is take any a belong to natural numbers. Then we can write
a as there is a prime p 1. You might do p 1 multiple times. Let us say p 1 is taken k 1 times.
You might take another p 2. You might raise it to the power k 2 and you might go up to p t. There
might be t prime numbers that we need to take and each with its own power k 1 to k t. So,
any prime number any number can be written as a product of prime numbers and that is what
this theorem says. So, typically when you want to prove something, if you prove it for the prime
numbers using this theorem, we can extend it to any numbers. So, now let us come to what is
called the greatest common divisor, the GCD. So, given two numbers, let us say you are given
two numbers a and b. Now, a has a set of numbers which divides it and b has a set of numbers which
divides it. GCD of a b is the number which divides both of them, but this is the largest number.
It is the largest number that divides both a, b. That is called the greatest common divisor.
So, you can verify a few properties. So, if p and q are primes, the GCD of p and q. So,
only thing a prime number is divisible by is itself for 1. So, only common GCD that they can
have is 1. Let us say it is follows from the definition of prime numbers. So, now let us come
to the Euclid's GCD algorithm. So, you will later code this algorithm in programming languages
and everything and we will look at it more slowly, but here I just want to introduce the
algorithm so that you will get a feel of what is going to happen. So, suppose you are given
the numbers a and b and we want to find out the goal is to find GCD of a and b we need to find.
Now, what we do that? So, we will take a and we will divide by b and find the quotient and
remainder and remember the remainder is a number between 0 and b. So, we will also assume that a
is a number greater than b. So, a is a number greater than b and we will do this division and
get the quotient and remainder. What Euclid observed was if you take the GCD of a and b,
the GCD of a and b is the same as the GCD of b and r. So, you take this large number a divide
it by b and get the quotient and remainder and if you want to find the GCD of a and b,
it is the same as finding the GCD of b and r and what I am saying is this has simplified the
problem. Why? Because a was a very large number, but when we come to b and r, b is strictly smaller
than a and r is also strictly smaller than b. So, we have reduced the problem of taking GCD
with one large number to two smaller numbers. So, we can keep on. Now, I can take the I mean
I can divide b. Let us say I take b and if I divide by r and get something else. So,
let us call this r 1. So, I might have some q 2 times r 1 plus r 2. I take b divided by r 1
and get the quotient and remainder and let that be q 2 and r 2. Then this same GCD,
the same equation I can apply again. GCD of b, r is again the GCD of r 1. So, this is r 1.
Let us call this q 1 also r 1 and r 2 and I can again do this operation. So,
let us say I mean. So, r 2. So, let us say r 1 is q 3 times r 2 plus r 3. I take r 1 again divide
by r 2. I take the first number divide by second number. Find the quotient and the remainder and
this GCD is going to be equal. So, you will have r 2 and r 3 and each time remember this r 2 is a
number between. So, r 2 is a number between is strictly less than r 1 and this r 3 is strictly
less than r 2. So, each time when we do this, when we do this division and take the GCD,
reduce the GCD, we are actually reducing the size of the numbers and finally, it has to hit
a prime number or 1. Finally, it has to hit a prime number or 1 or it is a proper division.
It is the two numbers are divisible with each other and then we can stop. Let us see a couple
of examples. So, let us take the GCD of two small numbers first. So, let us say we take the GCD of
26 and 21. So, we can divide 26 by 21 the quotient will be only 1 and the remainder would be 5. So,
it is the same as the GCD of 21 and 5. So, if I divide 26 by 21, I will get a quotient of 1
and the remainder of 5 and what is the GCD of 21 and 5? Remember 5 is a prime number. So,
I mean the only thing that divides 5 is 1 and 5 only and is 21 a multiple of 5? No,
it is not a multiple of 5. So, we again need to divide and get the quotient and remainder.
So, it is same as the GCD of 5 and 1 because the quotient is 4 and the remainder is 1 and the GCD
of 5 and 1, we know the GCD of 5 and 1 is I mean the only I mean divisors of 5 is 5 and 1. So,
the only GCD is this going to be 1. So, let us take a bigger example so that we get more
comfortable. Let us take the I mean I have a written down example here which is 1147 and 899
let us say. Now, if I want to find the GCD of these two large numbers, first I will divide,
get the quotient and remainder. So, the quotient is clearly 1. You can only do a multiple of 1
of 899 to get 1147 and what is the remainder? You will have 101 plus 147 which is 248. So,
this is same as the GCD of 899 and 248. Now, let us look at so now let us divide 899 with 248. So,
you can divide it and you will get a quotient of 3. So, maximum you can get is 746 sorry 744. 744
is the nearest multiple of 248 of 899. So, this becomes the GCD of 248 and what is going
to be the remainder? So, 899 minus 744. So, 744 it will be 155. So, again this GCD would
become there is only the quotient is 1. So, it is only 155 and if you subtract you will get 93
and you can take the GCD. So, 93 will come here and then it is a single multiple of 93 and if
you subtract you will get 62 right 62 and this will be the GCD of again 62 will come here and
then if you divide what will you get? You will get 31 and now 62 is a multiple of 31. So,
the greatest common divisor of 62 and 31 is 31 itself and we can stop there the remainder is
0. When the remainder is 0 we stop. So, you already have a multiple. So, we started with
two large numbers and slowly the numbers are decreasing and it became some simple numbers
and we could compute the GCD and this is what is called the GCD's Euclid's GCD algorithm.
So, let us recap what we did in this lecture. So, let us recap what we did in this lecture. So,
we looked at the divisibility relation. So, the what is called the divisibility relation and we
looked at the graph of it and found that this reflective non-symmetric and transitive and we
so that any number can be divided by another number and you can get a quotient and the reminder
and the important thing is the remainder has to be less than b and then we looked at primes and
the prime number theorem which is any number can be decomposed as a product of prime numbers.
Then we looked at what is called the greatest common divisor and we looked at what is the
Euclid's GCD algorithm. What does the Euclid's GCD algorithm do? If you want to take the GCD of
two big numbers, divide the bigger number with the smaller number, get the quotient and reminder
and the GCD of a b is nothing but the GCD of b and the remainder and we can keep on doing this
again and again. So, you got a smaller numbers b and r 1 and then you got even smaller numbers
r 1 and r 2, r 2 and r 3 and so on. So, we so example run of this two example run of this
and see how you can compute GCD by doing this. That is all from today's video. Thank you.
