Welcome everyone and let us continue our yeah I mean discussion on algorithms. And in this
video, we will look at some graph algorithms, specifically graph traversal algorithms. Again,
this is not a thorough introduction to algorithms that will come much later. So, but it is good
to have a idea of these things, so that it might be covered in the later some of the programs can
be looked at in the later courses. So, what is let us look at a graph. So, this is a interesting
graph. So, let us look at this. So, let us number this and then there is some vertices
here also and you have a edges like this. So, edges not there. So, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
so and there is also these edges. So, this is a graph which comes at various place in
computer science. We will come to maybe we will see it later I mean in one of the other
courses. So, this is a yeah graph and let us just quickly see the I mean the adjacency
matrix of this graph. So, let us just quickly recall the adjacency matrix. So, there is
a column and a row for every vertex. So, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, again there is
a row for 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and in the first row you will have. So, one has
neighbors 4, 3 and 6. So, at 4, 3 and 6 there will be a 1 and 0 everywhere else that is
the adjacency matrix the first row of the adjacency matrix of similarly, if you look
at the 2, 5, 4 and 7 are neighbors. So, for 2, 5, 4 and 7 are neighbors everywhere else
there is zeros. For 3, 1, 5 and 8 are neighbors. So, 1, 5 and 8 are neighbors. For 4, 1, 2
and 9 are neighbors 1, 2 and 9 are the neighbors and so on I want to write the entire matrix
yeah and the interesting thing to notice this is a undirected graph right. So, if you look
at the 1, 3 entry it is the same as 3, 1 entry yeah it is a symmetric matrix yeah. So, that
graph that we will use in this lecture yeah and the first algorithm that we want to look
at the traversal algorithm we want to look at is called the breadth first search breadth
first search for traversal yeah. So, typically yeah we show different graphs
yeah real world graphs in the yeah previous lecture yeah. So, you could have a graph of
railway networks you could have a graph of routes you could have a graph of the internet
yeah where the where you have a edge if one website is linked to the other website yeah
and then the question is yeah whether I mean is there a way to go from one website to another
website yeah is one person is there a connection between one person and another person through
some intermediate fronts yeah. So, all these questions we want to ask and
typically the solution is through one of these algorithms yeah. So, let us see what the breadth
first search is. So, to introduce breadth first search you also need yeah yeah a what
is called a data structure yeah called queue yeah queue is also called first in first out
first in first out or FIFO yeah. So, what does it mean yeah. So, let us start a breadth
first search yeah at the starting in the node 1 yeah. So, when you run this algorithm intermediately
it will keep some what is called a queue in memory yeah. So, initially at the step 1 yeah
at the step 1 yeah the queue would be empty yeah and when you start then we will add the
vertex 1 into it yeah. So, you will have the vertex. So, this is the queue and you will
put the vertex 1 into it. So, you have the vertex 1 yeah and then what you will do is
at each step of the algorithm you will take yeah element out from the right side yeah
you will put the element from the yeah from this side and you will take the element from
the right side yeah and you will take the element and look at all these neighbors and
add it into the queue yeah. So, in the second step yeah what are the neighbors
of 1 it is 4 3 and 6 yeah it is 4 3 and 6 and you will add it into the queue yeah. So,
yeah. So, 1 went out and now the queue looks like this 4. So, let us keep the convention
that smallest numbers appears first yeah. So, 3 4 and 6 yeah. So, we put these numbers
yeah in the order 3 4 and 6 into this queue yeah we put it like this and next step we
will take the first that one that was in the first in the queue is 3 yeah I will take that
yeah just a second sorry yeah. So, we will take out 3 and yeah. So, we will take out 3
yeah. So, what are the neighbors of 3 the neighbors of 3 is 1 5 and 8 yeah 1 is already
visited yeah after this step 1 is already visited we already had a look at 1 yeah. So,
so 1 went out here. So, the 1 went out here here 3 went out yeah. So, 1 and 3 is already
visited. So, we do not need to do anything about it. So, if we take it 3 neighbors that
is already not visited it is 5 and 8 yeah. So, we need to add 5 and 8 to the queue yeah.
So, you will have 8 5 6 4 and 3 already went out in the previous step. So, we do not need
to add that yeah next we will take out 4 we will take out 4 look at the neighbors of 4
it is 1 2 and 9 yeah. So, 1 is already visited it earlier yeah. So, only 2 and 9 are remaining
yeah. So, in the 4 step yeah we will add 2 and 9 to the queue yeah. So, you will have
9 2 8 5 6 yeah yeah. So, again 6 comes out yeah. So, 6 comes out and what are the neighbors
of 6 it is 1 7 and 10 yeah. So, 7 and 10 has not been looked at so far yeah. So, in the
5th step you will have 10 we will put in 10 and 7 here and we will keep whatever was there
earlier yeah. So, now we will take out 5 yeah. So, 5 is in the yeah beginning of the queue
now yeah 5 we will take out yeah and what happens 5 neighbors are what 5 neighbors are
10 2 and 3 yeah. So, 3 is already visited. So, we do not need to consider it 2 is already
in the queue yeah. So, 2 is already in the queue. So, we do not again need to add it
yeah. So, only 10 needs to be added. So, neighbors of 5 was 10 and actually already 10 is also
in the queue already yeah. So, 10 is also in the queue already because earlier we had
a look at 6. So, 10 is already in the queue yeah. So, we do not need to add anything to
the queue because all the numbers either has been visited or it is already in the queue
yeah. So, you will have 10 7 9 2 8 yeah. Now, 8 comes out yeah what are the neighbors
of 8 it is 3 9 and 7 yeah. So, 3 is already visited 9 and 7 is already there yeah. So,
there is nothing you need to add into a queue yeah. So, in the 7 step yeah just now the
queue keeps on reducing yeah. So, you have 2 here 9 here 7 here and 10 here yeah and
step in the 8 step again 2 comes out yeah. So, I think all the numbers is either in the
queue or it is visited right because 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10. So, there is nothing remaining
yeah. So, there is nothing you need to add. So, now the mean the stack the queue keeps
on decreasing which is now 9 comes here 7 comes here 10 comes here yeah and then you
will have the 9 step where the 9 goes out and 7 and 10 remains here yeah and in the
10 step yeah again all the neighbors of 7 is either in this list yeah. So, there is
9 and 7 yeah or it has its 10 is already in the queue and finally, again you tend to look
all the neighbors of 10 has been visited and we can stop yeah.
So, yeah. So, this sequence of numbers this sequence of numbers that is 1 3 4 6 5 8 2
9 7 10 yeah this sequence of numbers is called the breadth first traversal yeah and if you
keep on doing this we will eventually reach all the vertices which are connected to the
vertex 1 yeah we will eventually reach all the vertex we are connected to the vertex
1 yeah. So, if you want to find all the yeah check if 2 friends are connected or not yeah
2 people are connected or not in a social network I can start from the first vertex
keep on doing this and each time check if the person currently that is being yeah visited
yeah that is the vertex here is the second person yeah and we can stop once you reach
that vertex yeah and this is called a breadth first traversal.
So, there is a second type of traversal that is typically used in graphs yeah which is
called the depth first traversal yeah. So, before coming to depth first traversal let
us yeah just recall one thing about breadth first traversal yeah. So, this was the initial
picture that we drew of the graph yeah this was the initial picture that we drew of the
graph yeah. So, based on breadth first traversal you can actually do a different picture of
the graph yeah. So, what is that picture you started at the vertex 1 yeah and then yeah
I found that it has these neighbors 3 4 and 6 yeah. So, I will put 3 4 and 6 here 3 4
and 6 yeah and then yeah I looked at 3 yeah and found that it has neighbors 8 and 5 yeah.
So, I will write 8 and 5 here. So, let me write 5 first because yeah. So, I will keep
the smallest number first yeah and then I looked at 4 yeah and found that it has yeah
neighbors 2 and 9 yeah then I looked at 6 and found that it has neighbors 7 and 10 yeah
yeah and then I looked at I mean what was the next number to look at 5 yeah 5 I looked
at now the neighbors of 5 the neighbors of 5 were 10 3 and 2 yeah. So, 10 3 and 2 so
the 5 already has 3. So, 5 had a neighbor of 2 and 5 had a neighbor of 10 yeah.
So, if you look at 8. So, 8 had 9 and 7 as neighbors yeah. So, 8 had in this graph 8
had 9 and 7 as neighbors yeah 9 7 and 3. So, 3 is already here. So, 9 and 7 yeah what about
2. So, 2 had 5 4 and what was the other neighbor of 2 yeah 5 4 and 7 yeah. So, I had to put
arrow mark like this yeah what about 9 9 had 4 and 8. So, 9 had 4 and 8 as well as 10 as
neighbors. So, I had to put 9 to 10 one arrow mark like this yeah 7 had as. So, if you look
at every vectors in the graph has the same degree 3 has exactly 3 neighbors in this graph
yeah. So, if you. So, all the 3 neighbors of 7 is already represented here all the neighbors
of 10 is already represented here yeah. So, this is another way of drawing the same
graph yeah. So, a graph could be drawn in multiple ways and the way this BFS traversal
work you can actually draw it in this particular way yeah and then you will see that if you
ignore these yeah these edges yeah actually it forms a tree yeah and this is called the
BFS tree of the graph yeah. So, you can ignore the last edges yeah which is the known tree
edges yeah, but all the other edges yeah order in which we came through the yeah graph yeah
that is called the BFS tree this is called the BFS tree of corresponding to the traversal
okay good. So, now let us come to what is called the depth first traversal yeah. So,
what is the depth first traversal yeah in depth first traversal we will have what is
called as stack yeah. So, in the mean depth first traversal we had what is called a queue
yeah where you have first in first out whatever was put in first yeah will be come out first
yeah in a depth first traversal we will have what is called as stack yeah which is last
in first out yeah or it is called LIFO yeah. So, what happens in a stack yeah. So, in the
first step yeah you will have a stack where only the element 1 is there yeah and yeah.
So, the interesting thing in a stack is you put in from this side only and take out from
the same side yeah in a queue you are putting in things from the left side and taking out things
from the right side yeah, but in a stack you put in things as well as take out things from the same
side only yeah. So, initially we will put in 1 yeah 1 has neighbors 3 4 and 6 yeah. So, in the
second step yeah so 1 was taken out and its neighbors 3 4 and 6 was added into a stack.
So, let us add that into a stack yeah. So, you will have let us say 6 4 and 3 yeah that was
added into a stack now the top of the stack is 3 yeah now 3 is taken out yeah 3 is taken out what
are the neighbors of 3 it is 5 8 and 1 yeah and 1 is already visited. So, you do not need to do
anything about 1 yeah. So, it is only 5 and 8. So, in the third step yeah you will have 6 and 4
will remain here yeah and 8 and 5 will be put in the same side yeah from the top yeah. So,
this is the top side you will say again the top of the stack will is 5. So, we will take 5 out yeah
and yeah you will have 6 4 8 already there what are the neighbors of 5 it is 2 and 10 it is 2
and 10 yeah. So, you will put 10 and 2 here yeah and in the this step we take the top of the stack
out which is 2 yeah and you will have the stack as yeah. So, what are the neighbors of 2 it is 5
and 7 5 7 and 4 for fold is already in the stack. So, we do not need to add it again yeah it is 5
and 7 yeah. So, 6 4 8 10 yeah. So, 5 is also already previous visited yeah. So, only thing we need to
add back is 7 yeah. Now, what is the top of the stack it is 7 yeah. So, what are the neighbors of
7 it is 6 2 and 8 yeah. So, 2 and 8 and 6 all of them is already in the stack. So, we do not need
to add anything yeah. So, in the sixth step yeah only 7 went out nothing happened nothing else
happened yeah. So, because all the neighbors of 7 which is 6 2 and 8 already were visited here
also already in the stack yeah. So, now we take out 10 yeah. So, if we take out 10 is the top
of most entry in the stack yeah. So, we take out 10 yeah and what happens what are the neighbors
of 10 it is 6 9 and 5 yeah. So, 6 9 and 5. So, 9 is not there 6 and 5 is already we visited yeah. So,
9 has to be put back yeah. So, 6 4 8 9 yeah and now 9 is taken out yeah. So, you will have 8
step would be what are the neighbors of 9 the neighbors of 9 is 4 8 and 10 yeah. So,
4 is already in the stack 8 is already in the stack 10 was already visited yeah. So,
there is you just need to yeah remove 9 from the stack. So, it is 6 4 and 8 yeah and I think by
now all the numbers is either you visited was already there in the stack. So, 1 2 is there 3
is there yeah 4 is in the stack 5 is here 6 is there in the stack 7 is here 8 is there in the
stack yeah 9 and 10 are visited yeah. So, now I mean there is nothing yeah new need to be added
in the stack because either everything is visited or it is already there yeah. So, you will have 4
now taken out yeah and you will have 6 yeah and you have 6. So, this is called the depth first
traversal yeah. So, this sequence of numbers 1 3 5 2 7 10 9 8 4 6 yeah this is called the depth
first traversal yeah. So, in the I mean yeah. So, in the depth first traversal we used this
stack yeah for doing this. So, if you actually draw the picture corresponding to this it looks
very different yeah. So, you had the I mean vertex 1 yeah and yeah. So, you had the vertex
1 and we found that it has yeah neighbors yeah I mean 3 4 and 6 yeah. So, it found we found that
it had neighbors 3 4 and 6 yeah. So, but then we only looked at the vertex 3 yeah. So, we only
looked at the vertex 3 yeah then we looked at the first neighbor of 3 yeah. So, the neighbors
of 3 yeah where 8 and 5 yeah and we only looked at the vertex 5 first yeah and then the neighbors
of 5 was where 10 and 2 yeah. So, and we only looked at 2 yeah. So, this is this was the order
in which we went yeah and then from 2 yeah the neighbors were only 7 yeah. So, we went to 7. So,
one had other neighbors which was yeah one had a 3 4 and 6 as neighbors yeah. So,
but we did not go there that is still in the stack yeah this is the way we came yeah and 3 had
neighbors 8 and 5 and 2 had neighbors yeah. So, from 7 where did we go from 7 yeah 7 all the
neighbors were already there yeah. So, from 7 you go went back to 10. So, how did we reach 10. So,
so 2 had neighbors yeah. So, 5 had neighbors 2 and 10 yeah. So, 5 had neighbors 2 and 10 yeah. So,
from the 7 we went to 10 which was the nearest thing that needed to be taken care of yeah and
then from 10 we got 9 yeah. So, from 10 we got to 9 yeah and from 9 we just jumped back
to 4 and finally, 6 okay. So, I mean I will draw the I mean the edges of the original tree yeah
also in the side yeah. So, there was these edges was there and these edges was never used.
So, yeah. So, we are going this way yeah. So, we have a very skewed tree here yeah in BFS we have
a like I mean proper tree which keeps on dividing dividing dividing we are going through each of
the neighbors yeah in a this order yeah in a depth first search you are traversing all the I mean
notes in the last in first out order yeah it is a different order in which things are taken.
So, yeah. So, if you look at the depth first search it will go through farther and farther
vertices much faster compared to I mean breadth first search breadth first search first we will
look at all the nearby vertices to a node yeah it will first look at all the nearby
vertices to a node before it will look at the next level vertices yeah to the node.
But in DFS yeah it is a it is a deep search where you go to farther and farther yeah vertices from
the node and only once you cannot find any more vertices you will come back to a previous vertex
yeah and so on yeah. So, these two algorithms are heavily used yeah and yeah in later courses
you will actually be implementing it yeah you will be studying this in more detail how fast
they run and everything you will be studying. But at this point it is good to know what these
algorithms are. So, again let us just recall. So, we were looking at graph traversal algorithms
yeah and yeah. So, we looked at this particular graph and we looked at the adjacency matrix we
looked at breadth first search yeah and we saw how to implement it using a queue yeah and we looked
at yeah the depth first traversal yeah and to implement it using a stack and finally,
yeah we looked at the breadth first tree also yeah the tree in. So, the breadth first traversal yeah
naturally forms a tree when it go through all the nodes and that is called the breadth first tree
yeah. So, that is all from this video thank you.
