So, welcome back, so what have we seen so far?
We have seen the concept of sample space, so just to recall sample space is a set of
all possible outcomes and then we have also seen what is called events, right.
So, what were events?
Events were subsets of the sample space, just for an example, so what did we have?
A sample space for a coin, a single coin toss was H, T and for a pair of coins it was H,
H, H, T, T, H and T, T in no particular order, right, so this is the sample space for a coin
and pair of coins, right.
Events were subsets of sample space, so what is an event in the coin turning up head in
a single coin toss is an event, so that corresponds to the subset H and then the coin turning
up as tails is the event T, so both of these are subsets of H, T, right.
Further we have for this the examples of events are the following, the first coin turns
up as, coin turns up as heads, right, so these are examples of events and then what we saw
were axioms of probability, so what did axioms of probability say?
The axioms of probability said the following, for each outcome in your sample space you
are going to have a value assigned to it, so how is that value assigned?
It adheres to a particular set of rules, right, so what did we have?
For every element V belong to the sample space we defined a value P of V and then for an
event E, so what is this?
This is defined to be the sum of all the elements that belong to the event E, so this is for
any event E, so this is what we defined.
So essentially what we are doing is overloading the definition of P for both an element and
a set, right and what else did we have?
We had this property that summation of P, we belong to, so we belong to the entire sample
space S, so what was this?
We wanted this to be equal to 1, right, so just let me remind you E is a subset of S,
so these are the axioms of probability that we had and further what did we get?
This also gave us the fact that P of an empty set is 0, right, these were the axioms of
probability that we discussed.
So let us see some more examples, so suppose, so let us deal with the 6 sided dice, suppose
a 6 sided dice is rolled, so now we ask what is the probability
that the outcome is divisible by 2, right, so let us work this out from the basics.
So what did we have?
What was the sample space?
The sample space was 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, right, so now what is the event here?
The event is the outcome is divisible by 2, right, so what are the possible elements in
the set S that are divisible by 2?
So what are those?
2, 4 and 6, right, now further I add this information that each outcome is equally likely.
So this is a premise that we are working with, it is not always true that a given dice when
you roll it each outcome is equally likely, but for the fairness what we need is all the
outcomes are equally likely.
So this is an assignment that we make to this value P, for each of these elements what does
this mean by each outcome is equally likely?
So for each of these elements, so we have that P of 1 is equal to P of 2 is equal to
so on until P of 6 all of them are equal to 1 by 6, right.
So now let us work these things out.
So what is P of E here?
P of E is nothing but summation of P of 2 plus P of 4 plus P of 6, right and each of
which is equal to 1 by 6.
So what I have here is 3 times 1 by 6.
So to make it more explicit let me write this as 1 by 6 plus 1 by 6 plus 1 by 6 and this
gives us 3 by 6 which is half.
Now again I am going to say the following.
So let us consider another event.
So what is the probability of the outcome being prime, right.
So what prime numbers do we have in the set S?
So let me number this by E1, I am going to call this E2.
So what is this?
So what are the prime numbers?
I am going to, so 1 is neither prime nor composite so I am not going to use that.
So 2 is prime, 3 is prime and 5 is prime, right.
So for this what do we have?
So we have probability of E2 using similar logic is going to give you half, right.
So now I ask another question.
So what is the probability that the outcome is divisible by 3?
So what are those numbers in our sample space that we have?
given by, so 3 is divisible by 3 and 6 is divisible by 3, right.
So now again what is the probability of E3?
So this is going to be probability of 3 plus probability of 6.
So this is going to be, so 1 by 6 plus 1 by 6 which is going to be 1 by 3, right.
So what we have done so far is we have taken 3 different events, right.
So there are these 3 different events and for this we have actually worked out what
are their probabilities.
Now so let us mark a Venn diagram for this, right.
So I am going to have 1, 2, right.
So I have this Venn diagrams.
So let us call this E1, let us call this E2 and let us call this E3, right.
So now I am going to list the elements out.
So what did E1 have?
E1 had 2, 4 and 6, right.
I am going to have, so 2 and 4 are here.
So let me just work this out.
So 4 is here, so 2 is here, 3 is here, then 6 is here, 2, 4, 6.
Then I have E3 is 3 and 6 and E2 is 5.
And there is 1 that is outside, right.
So these are Venn diagram.
So what do we have?
So we have E1 intersection E2 is 2.
We have E2 intersection E3 to be 3.
We have E3 intersection E1 to be 6, right.
So now what we have here is E1 intersection E2 intersection E3 is empty.
So now what we observe is the probability of E1 union E2 rather.
So let us write this as a sets.
So I have E1 union E2 union E3.
So what is this given by E1?
So let us do this.
So my claim is that E1 union E2 union E3 can be written as P of E1 plus P of E2 plus P
of E3 minus P of E1 intersection E2 minus P of E2 intersection E3 minus P of E3 intersection
E1 plus P of E1 intersection E2 intersection E3, right.
So now I am going to leave it to you to work this out and verify this.
But let us work out as very simple example.
So let us just work with P of E1 intersection E3 or let us say union.
So I claim that it is equal to P of E1 plus P of E3 minus P of E1 intersection E3, right.
So what is this going to be?
So what do I have here?
So the set E1 union E3 is, so what do I have E1 union E3 is 2, 4, 3 and 6, it is 2, 4,
3 and 6.
And what is E1?
So E1 was a set 2, 4 and 6 and E3 was 3 and 6 and the intersection contains only 6, right.
So now let us work this out.
So what is this?
This summation of P2 plus P4 plus P3 plus P6.
What is this?
So I am just going to draw a line to separate these two.
This is going to be P2 plus P4 plus P6 and what do I have here?
I have P3 plus P6 and I have P6 here, right.
So what is happening here?
So we have P2, P4, P3 and P6 being added.
So let us say I have for P2 here I have a P2 here.
For P4 here I have a P4 here.
For a P3 here I have a P3 here.
For a P6 I have a P6 here, but I have an extra one, so that is the reason I am subtracting
it out.
So if you actually look at this Venn diagram, so I have this and this, right, I have added
these two parts, but then this part is being added twice, so that is the reason I am subtracting
it once, right.
So if I take it to three sets, you can verify the same thing holds.
So now for a general N, suppose I have N events, E1, E2 and so on until EN, what I can say
about this is P of E1 union E2 union EN can be written as summation over i from 1 to N,
I have P of EI plus rather, okay, I am going to write as minus 1 times I have i less than
J between 1 to N, I have P of EI intersection EJ plus for a general term, for a general
rth intersection I am going to write as P of minus 1 to the power of r plus 1, that
is the reason I have written this as this.
So this is going to be summation over all i1, i2, let us say in an increasing order
until IR, so I have N here, I have P of EI1 intersection PEI2 and so on until EIR.
And so on until minus 1 to the N plus 1 of summation over, oh here anyway, so since
I have N elements here, I am just going to have E1 intersection E2.
So there is only one choice of i1 to iN where each of them is distinct and they are between
1 to N, so which is why I ignore the summation over here, right.
So this is a set theoretic interpretation of writing your unions, right, so far so good.
So now let us work out some basic problems and let us see where it takes us.
So I have a following question, if three balls are drawn from a bowl randomly where the bowl
contains 6 white balls and 5 black balls, right.
So what is the probability that one of the balls is white and the rest of them, right.
So this is a question which is very much basic and it is related to the counting problems
that you have seen before.
So let us work this problem out from the first principles, right.
So the first principle tells us, so what is your sample space?
So there are three balls which are being drawn.
So for these three balls, we want to figure out what are the possible outcomes, right.
So I am going to list the outcomes out, so I can have white, white, black, I have white,
black, white, I can have black, white, white, then I can have white, black, black, then
I can have black, white, black, then I can have black, black and white and then I can
have white and I can have white.
So again, so here the premise again is each ball is equally likely.
So let us make that expressed as well, uniformly, rather each ball is equally likely, right.
So good.
So this is our sample space.
So now what would the event look like?
So what is the subset that you are interested in?
You want one white ball and two black balls, right.
So what is my event look like?
So my event looks like the following.
So I have white, black, black, then I have black, white and black and then I have, what
do I have?
Then black, black and white, right, this is my event.
So this says I have one white ball and two black balls, right, this is my event.
Now I want to figure out what is the probability of probability of E, right.
So what would that be?
That would be nothing but probability of WB B plus probability of B WB plus probability
of B B W, right.
So now let us look at each of them individually, right.
So what do I have here?
So let us look at probability of W B and B. So what would this be?
I have, how many white balls do I have?
I have 6 white balls, right.
So the first ball I am picking is I am picking a white ball from, how many balls are there?
11 balls, right, I have this, right.
So I am going to revisit why it is going to be 6 by 11.
So then I have 5 black balls and how many balls are left?
I have 10 balls which are left.
So it is 5 by 10.
And then what I have?
So I have 4 black balls left, sorry.
So I had 6 black balls left, sorry 6 white balls left and I picked up one of them, right.
And the 5 black balls remain intact.
So I have 4 by 9.
So let us see this.
So I had 6 white balls and 11 balls overall.
So what we did was we picked one of the 6 balls out of the 11 balls available, right.
And then what we do next?
For the second ball that we are picking, we want that to be black ball.
For that to be a black ball, what did we have?
There are 5 black balls left and there are 10 balls left overall.
So now we have 5 by 10.
And then after this, there are 4 black balls left and there are 9 overall balls left.
So that gives us this probability of 4 by 9 for that event.
And these are independent events.
So let us, we will come to this why I am calling this independent.
So what we have here is the probability of picking white and then black and then black
is the following, right.
So then what about the rest of them?
So what about probability of picking black, white and black?
So this is going to be something similar.
So what I would have is I would have, I have 5 black balls.
So I have 5 divided by 11, right.
And then I have 6 white balls.
I am going to have 6 by 10.
And then I have 4 black balls.
So I am going to have 4 by 9, right.
Similarly what I am going to have is probability of B B W, right.
So this is going to be, so what is going to be 5 by 11 into 4 by 10 into 6 by 9.
So this is what we have, right.
So each of this is going to give us 120 by 990.
So what is more interesting here is that the way you get this number 120 by 990 is different
for each of these individual elements of my sample space, right.
So for each of these outcomes the way I obtain this number is different, right.
So please be careful about what, when you are working out examples of this form, please
be careful about how you get the outcome, right.
So if I put this all together, so what I would have is 3 times 120 by 990.
So what I would get is 12 by 33, it is roughly 4 by 11, right.
So it is with this probability that I would have one of the balls being white and the
rest are black, right.
So this is working out your probabilities from the first principles.
So one, you may actually do it much more simply by doing the following, right.
So what would you do?
I have 6 white balls and I am choosing one of them.
And then I have 5 black balls, I am choosing two of them.
Then I have 11 balls out of which I am choosing 3, right.
So what is this number?
So I have 6 factorial by 5 factorial into, I have 5 factorial by 3 factorial into 2 factorial
divided by 11 factorial by 8 factorial times 3 factorial, right.
If I work this out, if I write it as it is going to be 6, so this quantity is going to
give me 6, right, and this quantity, so what do I get?
So this quantity is going to give me 5 into 4, right, and then this quantity is going
to give me 11 into 10 into 9, right.
And I have this left and I have this left.
So what is that going to be?
So that is going to give me 3 factorial by 2 factorial is going to give me 3, which is
essentially the same number that we got above, right.
So what this is doing, what this formula is doing is it is implicitly considering the
ordering of when the white is being picked, right.
So when you do this formula, it does not give you as much insight as working things
out using events and sample spaces, right.
So but this formula is more explicit, right.
I have, so I have 11 balls, I am picking 3 balls, out of which I want one of them to
be white and the rest 2 to be black, right.
But inherently you have this ordering term also that is helping you out.
So good.
So this is the following example.
So now we ask slightly more complicated question, not very complicated but slightly more complicated.
So we ask the following.
So what is the probability that at least one white ball is picked, right.
So what is the probability that at least one white ball is picked?
So let us call this event F, right.
So what, now I am going to stare at my sample space.
I am just going to copy it here to make my life easier.
So I am going to keep it here, yeah.
So now what is my, so I have this.
So I can take everything except this, right.
So I am just going to call this.
So now this is the probability, I mean so this is the event where you have at least
one white ball, right.
So we have already considered, so what did we consider?
We consider the cases where you have 2 black balls and a white ball, right.
Now we need to compute these 3.
So what are those?
So let us work it out again.
So just to give you more practice about how to work these things out.
So this is going to be, I have a first white ball.
So I have the probability of picking that is 6 by 11 and then I have a white ball again.
So there are 5 white balls left and there are totally 10 balls left and then I have
one black ball.
So how do I pick this one black ball?
So what is that going to be?
So it is going to be I have 5 black balls left and I have overall 9 balls left, right.
Similarly I have P of, so what is next WBW, right.
So this is going to be 6 by 11 times 5 by 9.
Similarly what I have here is P of BWW, it is going to be 5 by 11 into 6 by 10 into 5
by 9, right.
here is nothing but in each of these cases I am going to get 150 by 990, right.
So now what do you have?
The other thing is I have 3 white balls.
So what is this going to be?
I have 6 by 11, 5 by 10 into 4 by 9 and this is going to give me same thing as before 120
by 990, right.
If I actually do this, if I actually sum it up, so I had 360 by 990 before.
So what I would have is, so if I put them all together, so I have, so from before I
have 120 by 990 plus 120 by 990 plus 120 by 990 from before plus I have 150 by 990 thrice
here plus 150 by 990 here plus I have 120 by 990, good.
So what is the value that we get?
So we get 120 into 4 plus 150 into 3 divided by 990.
So this is the probability of event F, right.
So the interesting part here is we are just working things out step by step from the basics,
right.
However, we can do this much more simply.
So when you just stare at this event, so you have F and it is easy to see that F complement
is nothing but, so I am going to write F complement is nothing but the event which is all black,
right.
So the last time what we said was probability of this event F is nothing but 1 minus probability
of event F complement, right.
So now what is this?
It is nothing but 1 minus, what do I have here?
I have probability of the event which is B, B, B.
So which is nothing but 1 minus, so I have 5 black balls, out of which, so I am picking
then I have 4 black balls and then I am left with 3 black balls, right.
Does it make sense?
So what do I get here?
Sorry, it is not, it is going to be 10 and 9, right.
So what I am going to, the denominator is 990 and what do I get here?
I have 60 over here, right.
So now, so this is what we have.
So I actually leave it to you to verify that this quantity is same as this quantity, right.
So now you do not have to work out everything rigorously, so you can use this prepositions
that we discussed before in the last session and make your life much simple.
So sometimes it helps to think in terms of complements of the events than the event itself.
So this will help us get what we want.
