So, we are going to start a new module for this course and this module is about probability
right. So, we actually talk about events which are uncertain using the word probability.
So now, let us suppose. So, what are we concerned with? Let us suppose we are considering processes
with no definite outcomes. So, for example, so we have a coin toss. So, if you have a
coin toss, it is not very clear a priori whether the result the outcome of toss is going to
be either heads or tails right and the other thing which you see more often is a dice.
So, if you had played any of these games or board games while you were growing up, you
would have seen a six sided dice and the outcome of the six sided dice was not certain before
this before the dice was rolled right. So, we are interested in processes without definite
outcomes when starting the experiment right. So, towards this we let us get some mathematical
definitions laid out which will help us understand these processes. So, the first thing is what
I call a sample space. A simple way to think about this is a sample space is a set of all
possible outcomes. So, I am just going to write it here a set of all possible outcomes
right. So, if you have the random process or the
process that we are interested in right now has a coin toss, the sample space is heads
or tails. So, heads is one possible outcome and tails is the other possible outcome right.
So, if our experiment or a process is a six sided die for that I have these as a possible
outcomes right and this happens to be my state space for a six sided dice and this is for
a two sided coin. So, we can actually keep listing the sample space with more examples.
For example, instead of one coin. So, further examples, instead of one coin if I had two
coins. So, if I have two coins then my sample space is going to be all set of outcomes that
is I have heads and heads, heads and tails, then I have tails and heads and tails and
tails. So, this is a case when I have two coins that are distinguishable. So, in this
case I am marking the outcomes for distinguishable coins.
So, for two. So, now considering the fact that you have already seen the set of lectures
on counting. So, I will leave it as an example or an exercise where I ask you to list out
the sample space for two indistinguishable coins right. So, I can also like list this
out for if I have two dice as it is very common in many of the games while growing up. So,
I could have my state space listed as i comma j where both i and j are between 1 and 6 right.
So, these are coins and dice, but my state space could also be dependent my state space
could also be defined for things like what is the life cycle of this pencil right. So,
it could be it is not very certain from the time I started using this pencil how long
this would survive. So, it depends on a lot of things during the life cycle of this pencil.
So, I could actually write it as t for some number for where t belongs to real values
and t is greater than 0 right. So, let me state them more carefully for a pair of distinguishable
dice and this is for a pair of indistinguishable dice.
So, this is the life cycle of my apple pencil right. So, these are this is the state space
which discusses all the possible outcomes of a process. So, this can be. So, we are
going to interchangeably use the word either process or experiment. So, this is the state
space. So, now I have discussed what is called a sample space right. So, then we will now
discuss what is called events. So, events the way they define mathematically are subsets
of sample space. So, let us take first trivial example which is I have one coin for a coin
coin. So, my sample space what is this my sample space is heads and tails. Now, what
possible subsets could I have. So, for the subsets of this are H, T, X, Y,
and the empty set right. So, now one event I can define event where. So, I have the coin
toss the coin turns up as heads. The other event I can define is the event
is the coin turns up as tails. So, these are two different events. So, each subset of my
sample space I am going to call it an event right. So, let us take slightly non-trivial
example. So, I can say for two coins. So, let us take
so an example of an event. It is all outcomes where the first coin turns up head. So, this
is the event. So, what is that event? The event actually is it corresponds to the subset
H, H and H, T. So, similarly I can actually come up with the events which are more subsets.
So, another example is going to be all outcomes. So, all outcomes are going to be the same
where the all outcomes where the coin tosses turn up equal. In which case my event is represented
by these elements H, H and T, T right. So, now, what we have so far is the event
we have a sample space and we have what are called events right. So, let us look at it
in terms of what we understand from high school Venn diagrams right.
Then I have. So, now, let this be my universe or the event
of my sample space right. So, now, I have an event is a subset of it. So, I have event
E then I kind of have an event F right. So, let us just use the word sample space. So,
I am going to represent it using the letter S right. So, from the diagram we know that
E is a subset of S, F is a subset of S right and in this picture I am actually notifying
that. So, from the intersection of E and F is not empty.
So, what are possible examples of this. So, let us call let us look at the example that
we have done before. Let us call this event E1. So, let us call this event E and let us
call this event F right. So, now, if you make it explicit this event E was H, H and then
H, T and event F was H, H and T, T right and this intersection is given by this element
which is H, H and this sample space if I have to write it again. So, the sample space is
nothing but H, H, T, T, H and T, T right. So, this is my sample space and these events
are my subsets right. So, each of them is a subset. So, as it turns out this intersection
also is an event because it is a subset of my sample space right. So, since we are actually
dealing with elements and sets we can naturally define intersections and unions.
So, since we are dealing with elements and sets we can naturally define intersections
dealing with sets. So, we can invoke unions and intersections right. So, above we have
I can also define what is called E union F and that is given by H, H, H, T and T, T
right. So, this is the definition of what are events and what is a sample space right.
So, now, we would like to say so far we have not used the word probability anywhere right.
So, we have defined what are possible outcomes and we actually looked at sets of possible
outcomes. So, rather subsets of my entire set of possible outcomes. So, what semantics
do these hold right. So, when I have a union here. So, I have these two events for example,
let us again discuss with the examples. So, I have a union of events over here. So, here
I was looking at union of events E and F right. So, E was an event where the outcome of the
first coin turns up to be heads and F was an event where the coin turns up the both
the coins turn up with equal value right. So, if I have a union. So, what am I saying
verbally? Verbally I am saying either I am looking at outcomes which where the first
coin toss is heads or I am looking at outcomes where both the coin tosses are equal right.
So, I am using this word or right. So, it is a union of objects and there is a intersection
I have this if I have to state this for the same example. So, I have I am looking at all
outcomes where the first coin turns up as heads and at the same time I want the coin
tosses to be equal. So, here we have an emphasis on the word and. So, the intersection we had
an emphasis on I mean with union we had an emphasis on the word or here we have an emphasis
on the word and right. So, the most simple thing that you can do is if you have a process
if you have an experiment please list out all this all the possible outcomes that becomes
your sample space and any subset of that becomes an event right.
So, here in this example note that I have not really spoken about this empty set right
even that is an event it is an event where you do nothing in terms of coin tosses. So,
far so good. So, now what is probability about right. So, you have some outcomes and you
have some events right to make our life simpler let us look at events which are single turns
in your sample space right. So, let us again go back to our first example
our simplest example which is coin tosses rather one coin toss right. So, as we discussed
before the outcomes are. So, what are the outcomes either it is heads or it is heads
or tails right and what are the possible events. So, possible events let us make it
more explicit. So, it is H T. So, you might have noticed that I am not taking the entire
sample space itself. So, you know that a set is a subset of itself. I am not actually
talking about this set when I am talking about events I mean ideally I should right,
but we will slowly see that it is actually redundant to talk about that.
So, now so far we said these are the outcomes and these are the possible events and we
need to quantify what is what is the. So, when does an event H happen and when does
an event T happen. So, suppose I am doing one coin toss I will have one result I will
do another coin toss I will have some other result right. So, now, if I have if I keep
on doing this coin tosses what kind of result can I expect right.
So, now, the whole notion of probability rather mathematically we will call it the axiom of
probability axioms of probability is. So, for each element for each element in the sample
space S we assign a weight we assign a value let us say. So, for each element in the sample
so value right. So, for example, if I have. So, let us say some value V some sorry some
element V in S we have a corresponding value which is PV and for each. So, this is true
and let me just erase this the second point that we have is for empty set sorry empty
set. So, let us say for each event E. So, what do we have? So, we have the weight or
the value of that particular event is given by the sum of elements in that set E right
and we have this property that for all elements V in S this value sorry this value sums up
to 1. At the same time what we have here is probability
of this empty set is 0. So, that is that is implicit in this definition right. So, what
we call probability or assigning a probability is an axiomatic approach right. So, for each
outcome we are assigning a value right. So, naturally for a coin toss with two sided coin.
So, we say it is a fair coin if it turns up head with half the time and tails half the
time right. So, this is the probability of the coin toss
so for a fair coin for a coin rather we can assign probability of H rather probability
of H is equal to half and probability of H is equal to half. So, this is the probability
tails is half. So, this probability of half and half it does not come naturally it is
an axiomatic way of assigning values for we say coin is fair if it has probabilities half
and half it is not necessary that every coin that you pick up has this property that it
turns up heads half the time and tails half the time right.
So, this is an axiomatic thing. So, you are assigning values to the sides. So, it is not
something which is very natural there is something weak build up. So, axioms are those which
are some ground rules that you work with right. So, based on these ground rules we build
up further structures. So, similarly for a six sided dice. So, we decide the probability
of each of these things to be equal to half. So, this is the probability of each of these
one by six right. So, let us call let us number these axioms.
So, let us call this 1, 2 and 3. So, for right. So, now, let us call this 1, 2 and 3. So,
this tells us that probability is a value that is assigned for every possible outcome
right. And axiom 2 tells us that for event the probability of an event is given by the
sum of probabilities of each of its constituent outcomes.
