Hello and welcome back to Python, Core and Applied Concepts for a Level Data Sence Work
Close.
So, in today's lecture, we will continue where we left in the last video.
So, in the last video, just a quick, as a quick, no recap, let me take you through what
we discussed in the last video.
In the last video, we started a discussion of lists in detail, and we talked about some
of the very basic operations on lists, like how to add elements and lists in different ways,
how to access some element inside a list, how to remove elements inside a list, and
then we ended with how to search elements in the list, and how to count the number of
occurrences in the list.
So, we will continue this discussion today with what we call how to sort a list, so we
have seen in again in some of the previous lectures how to do, how to write sorting algorithm
that we have written by hand.
So, those were no correct algorithms, but then may not be the most efficient algorithm,
so if you are working inside Python, you may want to prefer most of the time in the
end-built function that Python library provides you.
So, this is one of the, you know, Python sorting function that we will use today to sort
it.
Let me, before we sort numbers, let me start with some list, and let me call the name
on the list is numbers, so we first, you know, try to create a list, and then we would
you know, see how the sorting algorithm inside the Python standard library actually works.
So, first let's start with some unsorted list, and let our list be 3, 1, so list contains
this numbers 3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9, and maybe you know 2, so this is, this be let's our, you
know, original, you know, list, which we called numbers, okay, so, and, so there is one
one way to sort these numbers in place, which modifies the original list, is used, you
know, sort method, so how to apply it, so let me first, so how to apply this, so now
what we are going to discuss is, you know, sort the elements in place, which will modify
the original list, so this is important to keep in mind, that there is a side effect,
and the side effect is that when you apply this function, which is called numbers dot
sort, then this will sort the whole list, and the list, the original list itself will
be modified, so what we are saying is, we are doing sorting, which is in place, okay,
which has a side effect that it modifies the list itself, it modifies the original list,
okay, so what is the exact way to call this method is numbers dot sort, okay, and if you
do this, I mean, you will see that the number, you know, these numbers are listed modified,
so to see it in X, and let me know, before modifying the number list, can we first print
this thing, so, so can we print the original numbers, and before we see what happened
to this numbers once it's printed, okay, one once it's sorted, so let me now print the
same thing, but now what we want to say is, this is after sort, maybe after sort, what's
the status of the list is, what I want to check, so over, we just print it, okay, now
if we run this, you will see that the original list actually gets, you know, sorted, and this
is an in place sorting, which has a side effect, so let me run this base of code, and you can
see the original list was, you know, 3, 1, 4, 1, 5, 9, 2, but now the sorted list, so after
sort, I'm not, you know, I'm printing again the same list, right, this is what I'm passing
as an argument when I printing, when I'm printing next time, and we see that the original
list itself has changed, okay, this is important to, you know, keep in mind that your original
list gets changed when you use, you know, list start sort, okay, so this is also called
in place sorting, which modifies your original list, okay, so you can use the same function,
let me, you know, copy this function, so you can use the same function to sort in place
and sort in descending order, okay, so wherever you want to, let me write down what we want
to do, now we want to use the same function, but now we increase, you know, increasing
order, what we want to sort in descending order, okay, if you want to sort again the
same numbers in descending order, now remember the number has changed to this one, okay,
the latest value in the numbers is this one, because we have applied an in place sort,
if I want to sort the same list in an descending order, so what we need to pass here is we have
to indicate this, okay, and the way to indicate it, you write down the reverse is equal to
group, okay, so by default the value of reverse argument is taken as, you know, false, if you don't
write anything, I mean Python assumes that you want to sort the list in the increasing order,
but if you want to sort it in decreasing order or descending order, you explicitly pass that,
you know, I want to reverse the list, I mean, because this reverse is equal to true, we'll
indicate to the library to the Python that you want to sort them in descending order, okay, so
we shall also, you know, print to see the, what is the effect, because remember, I mean, we are
not storing the value in some other variables, so if you want to see what happened to, you know,
the list or what's the side effect of this, let's say instruction, then we need to explicitly
print it, so let me not print, again, I mean same thing, right, after sort,
but now, you know, what we have passed is not true, value, true, no reverse, so this is what we
have passed, and now we want to see what is the effect of this,
and you can see as expected, we get the reverse list, right, so this is how, you know, we can
use this, you know, short function in build library, short function to actually sort
a list either in, you know, increasing order or in descending order, but, you know, in both the
cases, you know, be sure that your list, original list will change, okay, so this will what happened
when you use this function in this particular way. Now, the next thing,
so one more thing that you may want to do is, you know, not sort a list, right, I mean,
you may also want to, you know, simply reverse your list, rather than sorting it in increasing
or decreasing order, we may sometimes want to, you know, do a simple reversal kind of, you know,
act, so if you want to do that, then again, I mean, there is a very easy way to do that,
use library function, dot reverse, okay, so what we are saying is, instead of sorting,
so here the action will be same because it's already, it was now sorted in descending order,
but let's see, if I just want to reverse it and not sort it, okay, so maybe, you know, for that,
so what we are trying to discuss now is how to reverse and how to do a implicit reverse of a
string, okay, of a, sorry, list, so let's say again, if I write known this, let me copy this
original list here, after this, let's say, if I define my numbers to be this one, and if you
want to simply reverse it, let me in your final list, it should be 2951413 in this particular case,
then the way to do this is you simply call this reverse method,
okay, and if you do this, then what you can expect is on this thing, so let us now print it also,
okay, let me print this thing, and you see, now you can reverse it, okay, so you know now how to
sort in increasing, decreasing order, as well as how to reverse a given string, and how to do
this in place, you know, activity, I mean, so the side effect is that in all these three cases,
your original list will get changed, so it will not get modified, but what if you want to do this
type of activity, but then you know, you don't want to maybe change your original list,
so the way to do that is use this sorted function instead of not sort, okay, so the sorted,
sorted this one, the sorted function creates new sorted list without modifying the original list,
okay, so if you do not intend to change the original list and just want to maybe get a sorted
version of it, then you can use this sorted function, okay, so let me again write down for you, now,
we want to use this sorted, which will create for us a new list, but will not modify the very first
thing that we want to apply, so let's be know first, have some unsorted again list, this can be
the same list, I mean, maybe we can copy this thing,
okay, this is unsorted, original list of here, so let me not print it also,
now before we or let me know first, so we initialize this unsorted and then we
pass this unsorted to this sorted function, and then whatever is, you know, return we
accumulated in sorted ascending, so by default again, I mean, it will do, you know,
sort in ascending order, if you want, you know, in descending order, then you have to again pass
as second argument, reverse is equal to true, the way I mean, we did in first one, because
in first one, we have only, you know, we only pass this argument whether to reverse or not,
but here since it's a function, you have to pass both the unsorted list as well as whether to
sort it in ascending or descending order, okay, so let me, you know, have both the variant of this,
maybe, you know, we first run this and then print the outcome of this as well,
so if I want to, you know, print the outcome of this, I can maybe print this one that we want to
sort it, of unsorted, what is it, so, okay, so this is the final result that we want to
know, observe, and we maybe, you know, we also want to, before we do that, we want,
so after we do this, you know, sorting, we also want to see at this particular moment,
what is the status of unsorted, right, is that will, you know, help us figure out whether this
has a side effect or not, this function has a side effect or not, okay, so let me, you know,
print it and see what happens, now you see the unsorted, the sorted list as this one, right,
but then, you know, your original list, which was, you know, unsorted, when I print it,
after this, you know, actually, this instruction get executed, even after this, this unsorted
remains the same, it has the same value, okay, and now, you know, as in the previous case,
you can also check the, you know, this reverse argument also in action, okay, so let's say,
if I want, now, to sort it in reverse order, and then, uh, maybe, uh, see what happens,
so what we can do is, let me, so now, sort of descending has, uh, sorted function,
and we pass the same unsorted, which was, you know, same, we have seen, right, it, it was not
modified, and then you pass reverse is equal to true, and we want to see what is the, you know,
descending, uh, so what is accumulated in this sorted descending, if you print it now,
this is what you get, okay, so now, we know, I mean, how to, uh, sort these, uh, lists,
and a few important thing to, uh, no note, uh, regarding this, uh, sorted, uh, and, you know,
the sorted function, as well as this method, list.sort is that, there, uh, somehow, you know,
optimal, you know, they are very, uh, uh, fast, and it's an, you know, enhanced version of, uh,
you know, maybe, team sort, uh, algorithm, so earlier, I, I'm sure it was a, uh, it was an
implementation of team sort, maybe before Python, uh, 3.20, but then from Python 3.11, uh, it uses
power sort algorithm, so inside this, uh, you know, sorting algorithm, we, uh, so Python developer
has actually implemented, uh, power sort, which is actually enhanced version of team sort, uh,
with optimal, you know, merge decisions, and essentially, uh, both of, you know, these, uh,
sorting algorithms are stable and adaptive sorting algorithm optimized for kind of real world data,
okay, so they are, uh, you know, a very mindful combination of, uh, insertion sort, and, uh, merge
sort, okay, so I'm not getting into the detail of, uh, you know, these algorithm, but just keep in
mind that they're, uh, no kind of optimal, uh, they perform in, of the order of analog and, uh,
complexity, and, uh, they're very efficient for a lot, okay, so you can be, uh, um, you can be
sure that if you use this built-in function, then you're using the most efficient algorithm for
sorting, okay, so both algorithm, whether I mean you use, uh, this sorted, uh, function, or,
you know, least dot sort method, combining insertion sort, efficiency, on a small, you know,
partially, uh, you know, sorted data with merge sorts, no reliable guarantee that you will finally,
you know, get thing in very less amount of time, and, uh, the hence, I mean, both of them are
exceptionally fast, and if you are working on, uh, you know, real data, then, uh, you know, it's,
you know, good to, you know, prefer this over even, you know, merge sort, because I mean, it,
already, it doesn't, again, start by, you know, sorting, uh, things, if you have some, you know,
already sorted thing, then it will not touch that, and it will, you know, it modifies this
insertion sort, and merge sort, in a way, to achieve the, this, you know, optimal time,
complexity kind of thing. Okay. So, now we'll not, no, delve deeper into this. You can search, uh,
on the internet about, what is the algorithm that has been implemented in this sort,
uh, you know, method, and, uh, the sort function. Now, let's, uh, go to another, you know,
interesting thing that we usually want to do with list. So it's, you know, about copying list.
So now there can be different way to copy a list. So copy means, I mean, I want to, you know,
copy this list into some, you know, other, uh, list, this is, this is what we, say, mean, uh,
you know, copying list when we say here, copy list. So there are various methods to create copies
of list, and we'll see, you know, them one by one. So, but before we copy list, let's,
now again, I'm create a list for ourselves. I mean, uh, let me, you know, call this list,
original list. Okay. And so this, let's take a little, a complex list instead of, uh,
simplest, now, list, uh, may contain, uh, list within, uh, themself. Okay. So one of the element
of list can be another list also. Okay. So this, this is what, you know, I'm calling, you know,
nested list here or more complex list rather than a simple flat kind of list. So for, you know,
this set of, you know, activity where we want to copy list, let's consider a little, uh,
can complement, you know, complicated list or, you know, a nested list. And for simplicity,
let me again, uh, begin a fresh list where my, you know, elements are like this. Okay. So I have,
you know, first one, two, three, you know, as, you know, first three element. And then, let me,
put in the place of fourth element or another list, which is, you know, four, five. Okay. So
remember, I mean, this is different than, uh, no, keeping, uh, one, two, three, four, five,
in a single, you know, list in a flat way. Okay. So this is a nested structure where your fourth
element itself is a list, which contains four and five. Okay. So note this difference with the,
you know, previous list that we have been discussing so far. Okay. So let me write a comment here
for your convenience. So this, what I want to say here is that this list, uh, is with nested
structure. Okay. So if you print now, let me, uh, you know, this, now if you,
print this, let me print here the original list, which we created just now.
Okay. So you can see the original list is one, two, three, and then four, five,
as the fourth element of it. So this, this is, you know, this is important to note that this is the
fourth element of the outer list. Okay. Now, I mean, how to copy this kind of list? So one very,
uh, it's no simple again method is to use this list.copy method. Okay. So we, we, let me, uh,
go one by one so we can, to the very first and, uh, you know, very simple way to use this, uh,
so let me call it copy one. Let's say, since we are going to discuss multiple ways to copies.
So just to distinguish between, you know, what's happening. Let me give, you know, different name.
So copy one, let's say we create by using this, uh, you know, list.copy method. Okay. So what was
our original, uh, list, original list was this, you know, uh, stored in the original, uh, variable.
And then if we say, original.copy, okay. And then, uh, whatever you get, you just keep it in
copy one is what, uh, will not you ever.
So let me now print also. So what if we print this, uh, now after, maybe, uh, you know,
this copy. So what we are saying there, after we copy, we use a copy, uh, method.
What is the output that we get here? Is copy one? Okay. Now if you just see, uh, what's the result? Then,
you can see, uh, this is what, you know, we expected that in copy one, we get the same list.
Okay. Now, I mean, I somehow, uh, like this, uh, you know, dot copy method because it's,
you know, kind of explicit, right? It clearly says that I'm making a copy, right? This list.copy
says clearly. So this is, uh, no Python style where you want to write on script, which is
readable and immediately, you know, clear to you. Um, why, uh, or what we are doing. Okay.
But again, I mean, those who are working with older version of Python, this might not be
available. So my, you know, guess is that, you know, it's somehow a new feature that might not be,
you know, available with previous, uh, version of I think Python. Okay. So older Python version may,
may not have it, but check it. I mean, it, uh, I'm, I'm, I'm not, I may not be completely correct.
And, uh, this is, you know, it's not a universal kind of, uh, no copy method, it works only on
list. Okay. So that you have to keep in mind. There are some pros and some coincides. This is
readable. It's very explicit, but again, it's not available in the previous version. And, uh,
it may be not only applicable to lists. So this is what you can keep in mind when using this method.
But then there is another, you know, more kind of universal, uh, you know, way to do the same thing.
And that's what we call slicing. So slicing, we can use for not only copying the whole list,
but also, you know, copying, uh, different segment of the list. Okay. So this is an interesting,
another way of copying, uh, listing to another list in Python. And the good thing is,
it works in all Python version. I mean, so, you know, I mean, this is present in almost all
the version of the Python. So if you're writing, you know, backward, compatible code, then this is
good thing to go ahead with. Uh, one another thing about slicing is that, you know, it works with
other sequence type also, like, I mean, if you, instead of list, if you want to know work and copy,
either whole, uh, you know, data structure or a subsequent of the data structure and data structure
being different than list, let's say, string, tuple, then also you can use the slicing method. So,
okay, so it's no more flexible in that sense. And as I said, it's more flexible in the sense that
I can also, you know, copy, uh, sublist, instead of the full list, it also have some, uh,
slight, you know, performance, uh, I think advantage over this dot copy method, uh, you know,
but that, that is very, uh, slight. But I mean, some, some people may find again, I mean,
this, uh, little more, uh, difficult to recall or remember that this is doing the job of copying,
because here it was very explicit, right? We write dot copy. So, uh, for beginners, it's very easy,
but this may be, uh, you know, not that easy to keep in mind, but given this pros and cons,
let's see now, you know, how to use this thing, okay? So, what we say is, let's say,
in our current, uh, you know, scenario, we just want to make the copy.
So, let's call it copy two, and here what we want to do is, this, original,
okay? And then you just write this column. So, what it means is that I want to copy the whole list,
instead of, you know, this, I could have written, if I want to us, no, uh, sublist, I can write
three numbers here, you know, first being a start, second being a stop, and then I can also,
you know, say, what are the steps that you want to take, uh, you know, from start to stop,
to select different elements that you want to copy. But let's say, for simplicity, right, now,
I just want to, you know, focus on the whole, uh, list. So, we, uh, you know, just copy the whole list.
The syntax to do that is just write a, you know, uh, colon like this, and this will, uh, copy the whole list.
Okay. And, um, just to see the outcome, uh, just observe and validate whether things are going
correct. We simply, you know, print it. So, we say that after slicing may be, uh, after,
slicing, uh, we, we want to see, uh, our, um, original list, right? So, this is what we did,
and what we want to see now is copy two. Because copy two is what, uh, we obtain just now.
Okay. So, let's see, uh, what happens here when we,
especially you get the same, uh, you know, our numbers and the list that you put inside the,
no, outer list. Okay. So, this is perfectly, you know, aligned with what we, you know, expected.
Now, another, uh, way to, again, achieve the same thing is, uh, using list constructor.
Okay. So, list constructor is again, I mean, uh, it's, it's more, you know, universal. I mean,
you can, uh, not only copy a list into another, uh, you know, list, but you can also copy other
kind of, uh, you know, data sets like tuples, uh, uh, strings, uh, also, you know, into a list.
I mean, and explicitly to this type of conversion. So, if you want to make sure that your,
no, final thing is always a list whether you are copying, uh, no, list, or let's say, or string,
or tuple, then you can explicitly say this, you know, uh, so I prefer this, you know, most of
the time because this is explicit and I know my final outcome is list. So, if you also want to do,
no, defensive programming and be sure of, uh, the type of data that is being written, then, uh,
you know, some of you may want to prefer using, uh, you know, this constructor over, you know, other.
So, worth the, you know, way to use it. So, let me end right down the code for this.
So, we need to do is let's create another copy. I'm creating, uh, you know, these different copies,
so that, you know, we can do some analysis at the end. So, let me, uh, now the, in this, this time,
what I choose says, I use this, no, list constructor, where I pass my original list.
And then whatever is written, I also want to, no print end, maybe see.
Okay. So, let me print it. So, what we want to print it is, no, after we apply this list,
constructor, original, right? So, what is that we expect here?
Is stored in copy three. Okay. And ideally, we should get the same.
And see, uh, this is what you get when we print out. Okay. So, as I mentioned,
it is most universal work with, you know, any interval and it can copy from tuple,
sets, strings, generator, etc. And this is very explicit, right? So, this may be good for those
who want to be, you know, completely sure about the output type of the, you know, copy function.
Okay. So, this is what we can use, you know, um, list constructor, you, you pass it.
Now, the fourth way, uh, again, which can copy all the element in your, you know, list is
this assignment operator. No, we have already seen the effect of assignment,
operating previous lectures. So, this is safe. So, you can do that assignment on list also.
Okay. So, the very, uh, no, long method that we want to see today is this assignment. So,
let me create another copy. So, let's call it copy four.
And again, pass the same thing. No, we pass origin into this one. And now we want to print what we
get here. Okay. So, after assignment, uh, what we get is this copy four. Okay. And let me,
you know, print it here. But after assignment, we get copy four. So, once we print here,
you see, we get the same thing. Okay. So, now you, you might have noticed that in all these cases,
the final outcome that we are getting are same, right? When we print them, they are same.
But we want to verify whether, whether, you know, the semantics of all this four,
no different ways of copying list is same or not. Okay. So, when I say whether the semantics is same
or not, we have to check not only the values that appear in the final variable,
but also whether, you know, they are somehow attached or they are, you know, completely separate entity.
Okay. So, what I mean, I'm more precise way to ask this question is that we want to now verify
whether, you know, the copied object is, you know, same as the original object in all these cases,
or there is some distinction between these, you know, different ways of copying. Okay.
So, we will, you know, verify whether the objects are different or the objects are same,
the object that you get after, you know, you copy something and the object that you already know,
originally, you know, copy from they are same or different. And for that, we use this is operated,
that you might have seen in the last lecture also. Okay. So, his operator is, no, nothing,
but a way to check object identity, whether to variable, you know, point to the same object in
memory or not. Okay. So, we'll use the same is operator here to show whether two variables are
kind of, you know, aliases or different names for the same object or they are independent copies.
Okay. So, this will, you know, explain us the, you know, if there is any difference between these
four, no different copies are not. Okay. So, learn, let me not try to write this thing here.
So, what we want to do is verify that they are different, no, objects, okay.
So, what we're going to do is verify that these are
different objects is how to check. Okay. So, the way to check is using this is operator. Okay.
Now, what we can do is we can just print that. Let me know.
So, we want to first see the way that the original is same as the copy one. So, for that,
we can maybe, you know, okay. So, this statement does the same, you know,
activity that we want to do right now. Okay. So, let me put some.
So, what we are trying to print is whether original is same as copy one. Okay. So, if original is,
you know, same as copy one, then in this case, you will, you know, get a true value. Okay.
So, if this expression, so you can see this is an expression, right. The original is copy one.
So, if original is not copy one, let's say, if they are different objects, then what will be
written? So, you will get a false value. Okay. But if they are same, then we will get a true value,
and that is what will be no printed when we run this. So, can we run this and then see
what's the output that we get here? Just to make sure that they are different. So, you see,
original is copy one is this is false, right. Because, you know, this expression that we have
written here evaluates to false. Because, original and copy one are two different objects. So,
if original and copy one were to, you know, with the same object, then this expression will evaluate
to true. In that case, we would have no printed truth here. But now, we see a false here, it, you know,
makes us happy that, you know, they are not the same copy. So, they may not be any issue of
aliasing and later on, you know, chances of ambiguity of, you know, changing your original variable
without, you know, even not noticing. So, this is a good sign that we are indeed copying and
you are getting to different objects. Okay. Now, can we do the same, you know, thing with the,
no second and other thing? So, let me know copy face this thing and just check whether in other
cases also we have similar nodules. So, what if I want to compare it, you know, with copy two
instead of copy one? Okay. So, if you run. So, copy two is also, you know, different
objects and what were copy one and copy two by the way. So, copy one was using this dot copy method,
copy two was using this slicing. So, both of them gave me, you know, different objects. So,
this is what we noticed just now. What about the list operator, which we give us copy, not three.
So, can we also check for list? So, let me again copy and paste it and see what happens when we
compare these two objects and want to check whether they are same or not. So, when we, you know,
run it, it falls. Okay. So, these three are actually, now in all these three cases, we see that
the object that we get after copy is different than the object that we copy. Okay. So, now,
what about the last one where we store the final value in copy four? Can we also print it in the
same way? So, let me, you know, copy this thing and paste and now we are comparing it with no
copy four. So, we should change it to copy four and then see. In this case, what do we get?
So, in this case, we get true, right? So, now, this is a, you know, very important to keep
or note of this that the final one, which actually use the assignment operator, you see the final
one where we, you know, use this assignment operator is actually creating, it's not creating a new
object. Okay. It's pointing to the same object that this original one points to. So, it's like,
you know, alias. So, if you change, now the value of, let's say copy four after this instruction
is executed, your original will also get no chance. So, this is a very important to keep in mind.
So, depending upon what you are using for copy, you may actually create alias and it may be
cause of lots of, you know, error later on if you don't remember or recall that you have created
alias. So, assignments, immediately creates an alias and it is different from these other three
previous methods of copying in the sense that, you don't have different objects. Now, you have
the same objects and two different, you know, variable pointing to the same object. Okay. So,
this is, you know, one of the, so this is very, you know, important to keep in mind and this is what,
you know, I wanted to, you know, you to note at this moment in time. Okay. Now, the effect of
the three first three method is not as simple as it might appear just now and we will try to see,
you know, in depth, what some remaining, you know, point that you need to remember when using
this first three. So, although in the first three, you see that the object that you created,
you know, the copy that you created were different, you know, objects, some parts of those,
you know, bigger objects may be common with each other and to see that, I mean, it's good
best to go with no one example, the example that we started with the original list and I will show
you, okay. So, now we are trying to understand this, you know, silo copy behavior. So,
this dot copy method, we also call silo copy and in all other cases, also we are doing,
no, silo copy with nested list. So, we want to see a little deeply whether we understand the
semantic is still correctly or not, okay. So, certainly, you know, the final object is different,
right. And that's how you got this false in these three cases, but true in the last case, okay.
So, but what about, you know, instead of do we understand it in the most, you know,
precise way or we are still left with something. So, for that, let me demonstrate it using some
examples. So, this will be the, you know, following examples to demonstrate to you, the
exact semantics of this silo copy, you know, instead of, you know, understanding the approximate,
you know, semantics, let's now dive deep and understand the exact semantics.
So, the exact semantics of silo copy.
Okay. Now, what do you select me? What do we want to do is let me copy this original one.
So, this was our original. Let's start again. I mean, now, afresh is to make sure that
we know what is our, know, original list. So, let's, this is our, know, original list. And now,
we want to make a silo copy. We just give a name, silo copy to indicate the same thing that
happened earlier. Okay. Just to, you know, now, remind ourselves that we are talking about silo
copy. Let's, you know, rename it as silo copy. And what we are doing here is,
applying this dot copy method. Okay. So, now, now we,
know, so before we start changing these list, this list value or no copying, this list value,
let's say, first print, I mean, that before doing any modification to any of the list,
if you want to see, you know, what is the value of this list. So, we can actually immediately print
it. Maybe here, select me. So, we have two things. We have original and we have silo copy version.
Now, we want to, before we do any modification with these list, let's say, try to print the value
of the list and see what's happening. Now, before any modification, we see that original is this
one and your silo copy is also this one. But we know that they are no different objects. Okay.
So, they are not the same objects. So, what we expect is if we change one of them,
the others should not change. Okay. This is what is our expectation. Now, let me, you know, change
some of the elements. So, let me now say that in the copied version, which we should
select silo copy. If I want to, let's say, change the very first element, which is not the
zero element, to some completely different valuation, so that we can identify this change.
So, after modifying, you know, this, if I want to again check what is the status of original and,
you know, what is the status of this copied version or silo copy. So, I can actually,
do a print, right? I can immediately maybe, you know, print the original and then also,
you know, similarly, I can now print this silo copy version also, right? So, let me print here the
silo copy. So, what do you expect? In the silo copy, certainly, I mean, we want, you know,
instead of this one here, 99, right? But in the original, we don't want to see any change,
right? And this is what is the intended semantics. We understand till now. Okay. So, let me, you know,
confirm it by just running it. And this is exactly what we, you know, guessed. Okay. So,
our understanding seems to be correct that, you know, these two are different copies. So, here,
you, you still have one. But, you know, after execution of this statement, in the silo copy,
you can see the value of the first value has changed to 99. Okay. So, you know, with top,
top-level elements, I mean, we can see that there is no, no difference in what we understand and
what is being, you know, executed. Okay. So, our understanding of the execution semantics is
completely correct. Now, what if we change something in the, let's say, nested, but I mean,
just to make sure that we understand things correctly, what if I want to, let's say, change
this thing in the, you know, silo copy. Let's again, if we pick the silo copy and want to change
this element, which is inside a, you know, list. So, this is again another list, which is inside
the, you know, bigger list. If I want to change this, then what can I expect? So, let me write it down
and then check what happens. So, what we are, so what we saw here in the beginning was that we
modify the top-level element in copy, right? So, let me write a comment to make sure that you
understand what we intended here. Here, we intended to modify the top-level elements in copy.
So, this is what we did, right? We did a silo copy and we modified the top-level. So, what are we
calling top-level? The top-level are this one, two, three. And what is the nested part?
Nested part is this four and five, which is inside another, you know, list, which appears as the
fourth element in the, no, bigger, you know, outer list, okay? So, this is what we said top-level.
Now, we want to modify, you know, nested element in the copy. So, let me,
we want to do some change here maybe at this place and then want to see whether, you know, that thing
affects the previous, or the original list or not, okay? So, how to do that? So, we say silo copy
and then how to access that particular, you know, element in the list. So, since, you know,
this is a list inside a list. So, the way to do is you first access the list by using this
index three. So, can you see what should be the index for this list itself? So, what is,
so this is fourth element in the silo copy list, right? First element was this one, second was
this one, third was this one and fourth was this one. So, when you write silo copy and then pass
this index three, you get this whole list itself, okay? Now, what we want to do is not to change this
whole list, okay? So, the outcome of this silo copy, you know, then passing this index three is a
list itself. Now, of this list, I want to just change maybe the first element, okay? So, how to
access that? We put a second square bucket and then we say zero. So, when we say this zero,
what are we accessing? We are accessing actually this element. And now, at this place,
we want to maybe, you know, reassign some other value, okay? So, what let me, you know, reassign
some value which is distinct from the normal value. Let's say, you know, we want to put here 88,
okay? So, what should be the, you know, effect of this thing that, you know, this should get
changed to 88, okay? So, after modifying the next element, you know, in the copy, if we want to
now check what is the silo copy and what is, you know, the original copy, then what we have to do,
so we have to print it, okay? So, let us now print it. Let me print this whole thing first.
Okay, so let me, you know, print this thing. Okay, so we will print, print, original, you know,
but let me print the silo copy first, okay? So, what if I want to print the silo copy first,
what happened to the silo copy? I mean, after we change it, okay? So,
we expect some change, right? So, and what is the change that we expect here in the silo copy,
let me run this piece of potency. So, this is what happened to the silo copy, right? So,
the copied version, because we, you know, explicitly assigned, you know, this particular element,
you know, this position, the element present here, to the value 88. So, you can see now your,
you know, silo copy has no 99 here and 88 here. But the original, what, what shall I expect in
the original? Because that is a different object, right? So, if it is a different object,
what will you expect? I mean, if I print original, I should expect this one, right? If it's a different
element, I shall expect the same thing. Now, can we, you know, validate our understanding by
uncommenting this? Let me uncomment this and then run. Now, see, the original also says,
now, this time, right? So, instead of, you know, getting this as output,
which we, we, we somehow, I mean, many of you might have expected at this moment that we will get
this same original as output, because original was a distinct object, then the silo copy, what you
get in original is at this place, the original does not have any more value for, right? So,
originally, it's also got no change, although we did a silo copy, you know, which created a different
object. So, what's going, you know, on wrong here? I mean, what's the thing that went wrong at
this particular no place? Okay? We are sure that this silo copy is, you know, distinct from original,
and we have checked it earlier on. So, for your, no, so, since we, we got something which is
not intended, which is, you know, not explainable from the semantics that we learned so far,
let me, you know, validate it, and what's the way to validate it? Can we print again to just check
whether the original and silo copy is the same thing? So, for that, we can simply here print
original is silo copy, and then check whether original is silo copy or not.
Okay? So, you get a false, which is, you know, again, I mean correct, because we expected that
original and silo copy are different things, right? So, if they are different things, then how come
when you change silo copy, original changes? Okay? So, something is, you know, wrong here. We are not
understanding the full semantics, maybe. So, what about, you know, if we check whether this part
of original and silo copy are same or not? We know for sure that they, you know, the original and silo
copy are, you know, pointing to different objects in memory. But remember that these objects inside
also, you know, contains something, right? And one of the element in this, you know, list,
was a list, list itself. So, although, I mean, when you, you know, copy using silo copy,
your outer, for outer elements are simply, you know, constant objects, right? So, for them, I mean,
you know, you have copies, but this inner element is a list itself. So, maybe Python is, you know,
not, you know, copying the whole list, which is present inside as an element, but only, you know,
copying the reference to this list, when you do a silo copy. Okay? So, but I mean, we are not sure,
at least from the outcome that we get, it seems as, you know, as the, I mean, both the inner list
or the nested list, you know, point to the same object in silo copy as well as original, you know,
copy. So, can we check that also? We know that the original is not a silo copy. Okay? So, for the
main, original list and silo copy, they point to different objects. But what about their, you know,
this element? I mean, can we check and compare them also whether they, no, so let me know what I'm
saying is, can we also compare this original three with silo copy three position? Okay? So,
that mean, print it explicitly. So, this is what we want to know, print that our original,
you know, at third position and what is the original third position? So, this is the list itself,
and silo copy at third position are they same or not? Okay? The original and silo copy is,
you know, clearly distinct. But what about this if I print it? Let's try, try to check.
So, what you get here is a true value, which is surprising, right? And this is the reason why you
get, no, something which you did not expect. So, even if you are copying using the silo copy,
which was, no, the first three method that we used, the flat, no, elements or the outer
most elements are, you know, copy it. Okay? So, you know, like, you know, one, two, three, these were
the constant thing that you get copied. But when it came to list, the whole list was not copied
into the, you know, newer copy. Instead, what we did was the pointer or the reference to the list
is copied in the new list. Okay? So, now, if you are working with nested list, and even if you do
silo copy or you do the first three, you use first three method, you are in danger. I mean,
if you change something in the nested part, then your original part may also now get changed.
Okay? So, this is very, you know, important to keep in mind that a silo copy creates a new list
object, but only copies the reference to the nested object. Okay? For the nested object,
it will not copy the whole object for the nested, you know, objects, which may be no list inside
or list, it will copy only the reference to the nested object and not the nested object themselves.
So, this is very important to keep in mind. The top level element, like, you know, integer or
string that you keep, you know, directly, are independent, you know, in the copy, but when you
have nested objects like, you know, inner list, okay, then there will be said, you know, between
original and copy. Okay? So, this is what was happening here. So, okay? So, this is explanation of
what I said, right? The silo copy creates a new list object, but only copies the reference to
the nested objects, not the nested object themselves. Okay? Now, if you go step by step, you know,
trying to understand what happens, so this is what happened, okay? Your original list was this one.
Your silo copy was this one, an outer list, are different objects. So, what are the outer
list? I mean, this one, this one, one, two and three. So, these one, two, three are here and
these are two, one, two, three are different objects, okay? So, they're not the same thing.
So, if you change one, I mean, another will not get changed, but then here, I mean, original
list had, you know, this list as the fourth element, but here, the reference to that list is
actually copied, not the whole list is copied. Okay? So, both of them actually point to the same
four comma five. So, if you change this list, four comma five, you know, any one of this,
then, I mean, the second one will be changed. Okay? This is what we wanted to say here. So, that's why
when we, you know, did top-level element change, zero, silo copy is zero, 99, the only change,
so it only changes, you know, the copies first element and not the, you know, it will only change,
you know, this element and not the element here. Okay? So, original remains unchanged because
integers are immutable and stored separately. Okay? And in case of, no, and this nested list,
you know, say, this element, you know, three, cause silo copy three was a list itself and list
are mutable. So, whenever, you know, you have mutable objects, as a entry inside this list,
when you're copying, even using no silo copy, the reference to that, you know, mutable objects
gets copied instead of that whole mutable object. Okay? So, both original and copy see this change.
I mean, when you do this change, because this is inside the, you know, shared object, which is
shared by both original and the copy, you will see the change at both places, okay? Because they
both reference the same inner list object, modifying the inner list affects both outer list.
Okay? So, I mean, and then, I mean, you should be very careful working with this kind of things,
if you're having no deep, you know, nested, kind of list, then you better, you know, use something
different. If you, if your intention is only to, you know, create a distinct copy, which will not
modify or changing that will not modify the original one, then you use some other method, okay?
So, the solution is this, you know, deep copy method. So, instead of silo copy, what we say,
we do deep copy, we copy everything. I mean, we, we never try to copy a reference rather than
we copy, you know, if, if let's say inside a list, there is another list, you simply copy the whole
list, you know, explicitly without, you know, and not copying the reference to the, no, copy list.
So, for that, we can use, you know, copy dot, you know, deep copy to create a completely
independent copy where nested objects are also duplicated, okay? So, this is possible, this is
completely possible inside Python, and when you're sure that you want to do a deep copy, you should,
you know, use this, and for that, you have to know import this, you know, copy module,
and then we can actually do this deep copy. So, what is the syntax for deep copy, then
let me write down it. So, the syntax for deep copy is not this copy dot, deep copy, and then
pass the original. So, I want to keep, let's say, I want to name it as deep copy now, let's say,
we want to keep in, you know, deep copy. So, I want to access this, you know, deep copy,
method inside this copy module. So, copy dot, deep copy, maybe, to this is the, you know,
syntax that we can use, and then we can pass the original.
Now, this will do, you know, true copying in the sense that it will copy everything. I mean,
not the reference, but the whole list, even if there is a nested list, you know, inside the
outer list. So, in this case, you know, modifying the nested element in the copy will not change
the original element. So, let me, you know, do the same kind of change that we did earlier,
and show you what's happening. Let's say, if I want to print it. So, after this instruction is
executed, if I want to see, what is the status of, you know, original, and also, maybe, you know,
what is the status of the deep copy that you have created just now.
Okay. So, we have, you know, copied, we have done a deep copy of the original into this deep
copy variable, and then next the action that we have taken is we have modified this deep copies,
third, you know, elements, or I mean, there's this list first element by accessing it using these
indices, and I'll sign there 88. So, what we, when we print original. So, since this is a deep
copy, in this case, I expect that this is an original value is not changed, but when I print the
deep copy, no value, which is no copied here, which I have already changed, I expect to change
there, right. So, if it is a deep copy in true sense, then there should be this distinction,
right, when we print it. So, now, let me, you know, print this thing then.
Now, you see, even though we changed this deep copy value, here 88, the original list did not change.
Okay. And this is what, you know, we wanted to note in this, no lecture that there is a difference
between this kind of no shallow copy and deep copy. And whenever you are, you know, clear that you
do a complete copy instead of, you know, copying some references to some, you know, said object,
it's better to, you know, do this kind of deep copy to avoid any, you know, kind of confusion,
and scope for, you know, future bugs. Okay. So, yeah, so keep in mind, this is very, you know,
important topic, and we should, you know, always be sure about what's happening. I mean,
whether, if we, you know, do a copy, does it actually creates a new thing or it passes just
reference to the new thing. So, you know, if you keep in mind these things, then there is very
less chance of error. So, yeah, please go through this lecture again to, no, observe,
observe the material that we have discussed many of you might find it a little non-comfortable,
but this is the exact semantics of copy, you know, shallow copy and deep copy. So, with this,
I would like to conclude today's session. So, I'll meet you in the next video. Till then,
goodbye. Thank you.
